  
? 
Abstract— Displacement osteotomy is an operative method 
for load relieving of pre-damaged joints through the correction 
of skeletally-based abnormal displacements of leg axes. We 
present an experimental operating room set-up to demonstrate 
the applicability of a robot guided water jet osteotomy for 
human tibial bones. We show that smooth, circular shaped cut 
surfaces can be obtained with this technology that allow for an 
easy and precise correction of the leg axis. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Displacement osteotomy is an operative technique for 
correcting mal-aligned leg axes in order to relieve the load in 
adjacent joints. Conventional techniques using oscillating 
saws are limited to straight cuts and only allow wedge type 
corrections which are usually associated with problems such 
as a change in length of the leg. 
The optimal shape for a cut path would be circular using 
the so-called focal dome osteotomy which maximizes the 
bone contact in the cut area and avoids length changes. In 
clinical practice however, this type of osteotomy is only 
rarely applied due to manual impracticability. Hence, the 
introduction of new technologies to support this type of 
osteotomy is desirable. 
II. MATERIAL AND METHODS 
An experimental operating room set-up was developed 
utilizing a Stäubli RX 90 robot to guide a water jet cutting 
head (cf. Figure 1). The planning of the cutting process takes 
place on a reconstructed surface model of the bone acquired 
from an intraoperative 3D X-ray scan. In the current version 
of our self-developed software, the user plans the cutting path 
manually by placing a segment of a circle on the screen such 
that it matches the anatomy of the bone. The software 
subsequently generates a series of set-points on the bone 
surface which are then used to control the robot. 
As the water jet would also cut through all objects on the 
back side of the bone, the water jet energy has to be 
dissipated to avoid damage to any human tissues. In order to 
achieve this, a jet absorber was developed and manufactured 
 
*Research supported by the German Research Foundation (DFG). 
R. Westphal and F. M. Wahl are with the Institut für Robotik und 
Prozessinformatik (Robotics and Process Control), Technische Universität 
Braunschweig, 38106 Braunschweig, Germany (e-mail: {ralf.westphal, 
f.wahl}@tu-bs.de). 
D. Zaremba, T. Hassel, and Fr.-W. Bach are with the Institut für 
Werkstoffkunde (Materials Science), Leibniz Universität Hannover, 30823 
Garbsen, Germany (e-mail: {zaremba, hassel, bach}@iw.uni-hannover.de). 
E. M. Suero, H. Nael, M. Citak, and C. Krettek are with the Trauma 
Department, Hannover Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany (e-mail: 
eduardo.suero@gmail.com, {hawi.nael, citak.musa, krettek.christian}@mh-
hannover.de). 
by our group. This jet absorber has to be placed on the back 
side of the bone and can at the same time be used to suck the 
major amount of water out of the operating field. The cutting 
head, the jet absorber, and the bone are equipped with 
reference bases of an optical tracking system (cf. Figure 1). 
This way safety is ensured, as the water jet will only be 
activated if the cutting head is placed correctly with respect 
to the bone and to the absorber so that the water jet hits the 
absorber surface on all set-points of the planned path. 
 
Figure 1.  The robot guided water jet osteotomy set-up with a plastic bone. 
We tested the set-up and the complete procedure 
including planning and robot guided water jet cutting in three 
operations using two alcohol conserved human cadavers. 
III. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION 
All performed osteotomies could be finished without 
complications and achieved the desired circular cutting shape 
with a smooth cut surface allowing for an easy and smooth 
rotational alignment of the leg.  
We conclude that robot guided water jet cutting of human 
bones is a new and promising technology which has the 
potential to improve the quality of osteotomies and 
furthermore support the healing process. However, to be 
applicable in clinical practice, further research and 
development is necessary. This includes further 
miniaturization of the jet absorber and optimization of the 
water suction device as well as the computer assisted 
planning procedure based on biomechanical parameters. A 
more detailed description of the system and the experiments 
has been published in [1]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Zaremba, R. Westphal, E. Suero, C. Krettek, F. M. Wahl, Fr.-W. 
Bach, T. Hassel, “Robot-assisted displacement osteotomy by the 
abrasive waterjet – concept and technical realization”  presented at the 
WJTA-IMCA Conference and Expo, Houston, September 9-11, 2013. 
Robot Guided Water Jet Cutting to  
Assist Osteotomies of Human Bones* 
Ralf Westphal, David Zaremba, Thomas Hassel, Eduardo M. Suero, Hawi Nael, Musa Citak,  
Christian Krettek, Friedrich-Wilhelm Bach, Friedrich M. Wahl 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2083
