  
? 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel double-hull boat with 
two wire-driven flapping propulsors. The boat comprises two 
identical hulls and a control center. Each hull is propelled by a 
biomimetic wire-driven flapping propulsor, which has seven 
joints, and is driven by one servo motor. Propulsion model of the 
boat is developed by integrating the reaction force during the 
flapping cycle. Motion of the boat is studied, including cruising 
and turning around. Two cruising modes and three turning 
modes are presented. Results show that the boat cruises forward 
steadily. In the tests, the maximum speed of the boat is 0.323 
BL/s; the minimum turning radius of the boat is 0.517 BL; the 
maximum turning speed is 13.9° /s.    
I. INTRODUCTION 
OAT is crucial in water transportation, including both 
ferry and freighter. All around the world, 90% of world 
trade is carried by water transportation [1]. In the history, boat 
was propelled by oar, barge pole, wind, paddle wheel, and 
screw propeller. Most of the propulsion methods are inspired 
by the aquatics, such as the oar and paddle wheel. Each 
revolution in boat propulsion had huge impact on human 
society. It is hard to imagine that without the screw propeller 
how the shipping industry would be. It is very compact, can 
yield large thrust, and is ease of control. However, the screw 
propeller also has its own drawbacks, such as low efficiency 
and noisy. Also, the turning radius of a boat with screw 
propellers is large. Compared to fish, ships are still far behind. 
People have been mimicking fish in developing fish-like 
vehicle or robotic fish for two decades since the robot tuna in 
1994 [2]. Some well-known fish-like robots are the Essex 
Robotic fish [3], the SPC-II developed in Beihang University 
[4], the CAS robotic fish [5], the Tai-robot-kun [6], the Firo 
[7], etc. All these robotic fishes shows the fish-like flapping 
propulsion has high efficiency (>60%), low noise, and 
provides the robot good maneuverability. These robotic fishes 
all have one flapping tail. During the flapping cycle, besides 
the thrust an additional lateral force is also produced. This 
will make the fish body sway along with the tail flapping 
during swimming. The body swaying makes the swimming 
unstable and impairs the propulsion efficiency.  
Attempts are also made to apply the fish-like flapping 
propulsion to boat development, such as the fin propulsion 
 
Manuscript received on August 30, 2013. 
Zheng Li  is with the Institute of Precision Engineering, the department of 
Mechanical & Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (phone: +852-3943-4237; fax: 
+852-2603-6002; e-mail: zli@mae.cuhk.edu.hk ).  
Ruxu Du is with the Institute of Precision Engineering, the department of 
Mechanical & Automation Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China. (e-mail: rdu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk ). 
boat [8] and the penguin boat developed in MIT in 1997 [9]. 
For the fin propulsion boat, a single oscillatory paddle is used 
to propel the boat. Therefore, similar to the above robotic 
fishes, the boat will sway during the cruising. Also, the paddle 
oscillation is far unlike the fish oscillating. It is more like 
using an oar to propel the boat. The penguin boat was tested in 
the Charles River in 1997. It has a single hull and two flippers. 
The two flippers oscillate in an opposite manner and can 
propel the boat forward effectively. However, detailed data 
was not available and turning performance is not presented. 
Also, the flippers mimic the penguin motion. They are rigid, 
which is unlike the flexible fish tail. 
Most of the boats or ships have a single hull. However, in 
recent years double hull design is becoming more and more 
popular, especially in ferry boat design. The double hull boat 
has two identical hulls. Each hull has a propeller. Compared 
to single hull boat, it has a wider deck, larger capacity, and the 
boat is more steady in cruising [10]. Also, the spacing 
distance of the two propellers enables the double hull boat 
turning around with a smaller radius.  
The biomimetic wire-driven mechanism (WDM) [11-18] 
follows animal, such as fish, musculoskeletal system. It has 
been demonstrated to be well suited to fish-like flapping 
propulsion. In this paper, a double hull boat with wire-driven 
flapping propulsors is designed and prototyped. It has two 
identical hulls, and each hull is driven by an oscillatory 
wire-driven flapping propulsor.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
presents the double-hull boat design; section III shows the 
propulsion model; section IV gives the motion control 
scheme; section V presents the prototype and experiment 
validation; at last, section VI gives the conclusion. 
II. DOUBLE-HULL BOAT DESIGN 
The double-hull boat comprises two identical hulls, which 
are driven by an oscillatory wire-driven flapping propulsor 
each. The two hulls are connected by a central platform, 
which is also the control center. The following presents the 
double hull boat design: at first is the flapping propulsor 
design and followed by the boat layout. 
A. Oscillatory Wire-Driven Flapping Propulsor Design 
The wire-driven mechanism is demonstrated be well suited 
to robotic fish propulsion [11, 14-16], including oscillatory 
form and undulatory form propulsion. It is simple in structure 
and highly efficient. Both robotic fish and boat are vehicles in 
water. Hence, the wire-driven flapping propulsor can also be 
applied to boat design. In the double hull boat, two identical 
A Novel Double-Hull Boat with Biomimetic Wire-Driven  
Flapping Propulsors 
Zheng Li, Member, IEEE, ASME, and Ruxu Du, F-ASME, F- SME, F-HKIE 
B 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2457
  
wire-driven flapping propulsors are used. The propulsor is 
designed as in Fig. 1. The propulsor is composed of seven 
vertebras, a caudal fin plate, a pair of wires, a drum wheel, 
and several pulleys. The vertebras have a similar structure. 
Fig. 1 (a) shows one vertebra in the propulsor. As shown in 
the figure, the cross section is ellipsoid, with a slot at the top 
and bottom respectively. The slots are used to fix the caudal 
fin plate. Each end of the vertebra has a semi-circle stage. The 
vertebras are connected serially. Two adjacent vertebras form 
a revolute joint by the semi-circle stage. The propulsor is as in 
Fig. 1 (b). It has seven vertebras. A caudal fin is fixed to all 
the vertebras via the slots. It has a lunate shape at the end. The 
wire routing is as shown in the figure. A pair of wires passes 
by all the vertebras and is fastened to the seventh vertebra. 
They are guided by the pulleys. The other end of the wire is 
connected to a drum wheel. With the reciprocal rotation of the 
drum wheel, the wires pull the propulsor flap side to side. In 
the design, each propulsor contains only one pair of wires, 
hence, the flapping motion of the propulsor is oscillatory. 
 
Fig. 1 Wire-Driven Flapping Propulsor: (a) vertebra; (b) wire-driven flapping 
propulsor and the wire routing; (c) joint in the propulsor 
As shown in Fig. 1 (b), the vertebras have similar structures 
and the sizes shrink from vertebra 1 to vertebra 7. The 
dimensions are as in Table I. The maximum rotation of each 
joint is calculated as in [12, 13]. For the propulsor, the 
maximum flapping angle is 92.16° . 
Table I Vertebra Parameters 
Num. H H
0
 D ?
max
 
1 15 2.5 36 7.94 
2 15 5 40 14.25 
3 15 4.5 36 14.25 
4 15 4 32 14.25 
5 15 3.5 28 14.25 
6 15 3 24 14.25 
7 18 2.5 22 12.97 
B. Double-Hull Boat Design 
The double hull boat layout is as shown in Fig. 2. It 
comprises two identical hulls; each hull is actuated by an 
oscillatory wire-driven flapping propulsor. The hull contains 
the actuator. It also serves as the base of the propulsor. The 
front of the hull is parabolic, which can reduce the water drag 
during cruising. The two hulls are connected by the central 
platform. The spacing distance between the hulls can be 
adjusted by the platform width. To avoid caudal fin collision, 
the minimal platform width is 2/π propulsor length. The 
central platform is also the control center. It contains the 
power supply, i.e. the main battery and auxiliary battery, the 
communication unit and the controller.  
 
Fig. 2 Wire-Driven Double Hull Boat Layout 
The caudal fins should be fully merged into water all the 
time in order to gain a large thrust. Hence, the propulsors are 
mounted at the bottom of the hulls. The hulls and control 
center are all covered with a lid. This can protect the 
electronics in the boat from the water. Fig. 3 shows the 
isometric view of the designed double hull boat. 
 
Fig. 3 Wire-Driven Double Hull Boat 
III. PROPULSION MODEL 
For wire-driven robotic fish, the body is slender, therefore, 
Lighthill’s Elongated Body Theory (EBT) can well predict 
the robot performance [11, 14-16, 19]. However, the double 
hull boat is wide and short. Hence, the EBT is not directly 
applicable. In this section, a propulsion model for the double 
2458
  
hull boat is developed. It is based on the reactive force from 
the water during the propulsor flapping.  
When the boat is moving on the water surface, it suffers 
four types of forces. One is gravity, the second is buoyance, 
the third is drag force and the last is thrust. Gravity and 
buoyance balance each other, hence, in the modeling, only the 
drag and thrust are considered. Fig. 4 shows the drag force 
and thrust acting on the boat.  
From the figure, the drag force acted on the boat is: 
 
2
12
1
2
d d d
F F C SU ? ?? (1) 
where, 
d
C is the drag coefficient. For the boat, the front shape 
of the hull is semi-sphere and the bottom part of the control 
center is in the water, 
d
C can be chosen as 0.5; ? is water 
density; S is the wetted cross-section area of a single hull; and 
U is the boat cruising speed. 
 
Fig. 4 Drag and Thrust acted on the Double Hull Boat 
Thrust is generated by the two propulsors. Each propulsor 
has identical flapping motion, hence, generating the same 
thrust. When the propulsor flaps side to side, the reactive 
force acted on the vertebras is as shown in Fig. 4. The force is 
decomposed to the X direction (moving direction) and the Y 
direction (lateral direction).  Only the F
x
 drives the boat move 
forward. It contributes to the thrust. The lateral forces of the 
two propulsors counteract each other. For each propulsor, the 
thrust generated is: 
 ? ?
12
1
1
sin
2
N
x x l i i i i
i
F F C A v v ??
?
? ? ? ?
?
 (2) 
where, 
l
C is the lift coefficient of the vertebras; 
i
A is the 
flapping area of the vertebra i; 
i
v is the flapping velocity 
relative to water flow of vertebra i; 
i
? is the flapping angle of 
vertebra i; N is the vertebra number.  
When the flapping amplitude of the propulsor is ? , and 
the flapping frequency is f, for vertebra i the flapping velocity 
relative to water flow at position q is: 
 ? ? ? ? ( ) ( ) sin ( ) cos
i i i i i
v q u q U u q i ?? ? ? ? ? ? (3) 
 
1
1
()
i
i j j i
j
u q l q ??
?
?
??
? ? ? ?
??
??
?
 (4) 
The tail is evenly constrained by the elastic caudal fin plate. 
Hence, during the flapping motion, it is assumed that the joint 
rotations are identical. As a result,  
 
i
i
N
? ? ?? (5) 
 4
i
i
f
N
?? ? ?? (6) 
Both the thrust and drag force relate to the cruising speed. 
When the thrust balances the drag force, the boat velocity is 
steady. The cruising speed can be obtained by solving the 
following equation.  
 
22
11
2
1
sin 2 ( )sin
( )sin 0
NN
l i i d l i i i
ii
N
l i i i
i
C A C S U C Au q U
C Au q
??
?
??
?
? ? ? ?
??
? ? ? ?
? ? ? ?
??
??
?
 (7) 
This is a quadratic function. There exist two solutions. For 
the double hull boat, the speed increases from zero to cruising 
speed and then cruises steadily. Hence, the smaller positive 
solution should be chosen. 
IV. MOTION CONTROL SCHEME 
The motion of the boat is controlled by the flapping of the 
propulsors. The motion control is similar to that of the robotic 
fish, but with a lot of differences. The following presents the 
cruising control scheme and turning control scheme. 
A. Cruising Control 
The flapping propulsor of the boat is borrowed from the 
robotic fish. One straightforward cursing method is letting the 
two propulsors flap as that of a robotic fish, as shown in Fig. 5 
(a). The robotic fish flaps its tail side to side to gain thrust. 
During the swimming, a lateral force is unavoidable. As a 
result, the fish body sways when it moves forward. In cruising 
mode 1, the lateral force is doubled as there are two 
propulsors. This is undesired for a boat, especially for ferry 
boat.  
 
Fig. 5 Cruising Mode: Mode 1 –the two propulsors flap in the same way; 
Mode 2 - the two propulsors flap in an opposite manner 
Another cruising method is letting the two propulsors flap 
in an opposite manner, as shown in Fig. 5 (b). In this mode, 
2459
  
the lateral forces produced by the two propulsors counteract 
with each other. Hence, the boat forward motion is more 
stable. Without considering the coupling effect, the thrust 
generated in the two cruising modes are the same. However, 
in cruising mode 2, a water jet is generated when the two 
propulsors flap inward, this will yield additional thrust. 
For both cruising modes, a full flapping cycle has four 
steps. In mode 1, these are: I – flap leftward; II – flap back to 
the resting position; III – flap rightward; IV – flap back to the 
resting position. In mode 2, the four steps are: I – flap inward; 
II – flap back to the resting position; III – flap outward; IV – 
flap back to the resting position. The flapping amplitudes and 
velocities in the four steps can be the same or independent. 
B. Turning Control 
Turning is important for a boat maneuvering in the harbor. 
For the wire-driven double hull boat there are several ways to 
turn around. Fig. 6 shows three modes for turning leftward. 
The brown block represents for the hulls, and the two curves 
represent for the two propulsors. The modes for turning 
rightward are similar. 
 
Fig. 6 Turning Control: Three Turning Modes 
In turning mode 1, the two propulsors flap in the same way. 
At first, they flap leftward, and then flap back to the resting 
position. This is the same as the turning method used in the 
wire-driven robotic fishes [14-16]. In turning mode 2, the left 
propulsor flaps leftward to the limit, acting as a rudder. The 
right propulsor at first flaps leftward and then flaps back to 
the resting position. In these two modes, one full flapping 
cycle has two steps. In turning mode 3, the left propulsor still 
acts as a rudder. The right propulsor flaps as in the cruising 
mode 1. There are four steps in the flapping cycle. Similar to 
that in the cruising mode, the flapping amplitudes and 
flapping velocities in the four flapping steps can be the same 
or independent.  
V. PROTOTYPE AND EXPERIMENT VALIDATION 
A prototype was built as shown in Fig. 7. The width of the 
boat is 320 mm and the length is 348 mm. The total mass of 
the boat is 1055 gram. The spacing distance between the two 
propulsors is 240 mm, which guarantees that even if the two 
propulsors bends 90° they don’t collide with each other. The 
hull structure and vertebras of the propulsor are fabricated 
using 3D printing. The material used is ABS plastic. A plastic 
fin plate is fixed to the vertebra, which not only defines the 
profile of the propulsor but more importantly confines the 
joint rotations. Each propulsor is driven by a servo motor 
(TowerPro MG995). A commercial micro controller (AVR 
atMega 16) is used to control the two servo motors. The servo 
motors are controlled in the same way as in [13-16]. A set of 4 
AA batteries is used as the power supply. 
 
Fig. 7 Double-Hull Boat Prototype 
Swimming tests are carried out in a water tank. The length 
of the tank is 1.8 m, and the width is 0.9 m.  
A. Cruising Performance 
Cruising performance of the boat is tested in still water. 
The boat is placed in the water tank and the propulsors are 
controlled to flap with different flapping amplitudes and 
flapping frequencies. In the test, the boat travels through a 
fixed distance as shown in Fig. 8. By gauging the time needed 
to pass by, the cruising speed of the boat is calculated.  
 
Fig. 8 Cruising Speed Measurement 
As predicted, in cruising mode 1, the boat sways side to 
side during the cruising. Therefore, in the test, only cruising 
mode 2 is studied in detail. The flapping amplitude of the 
propulsors increases from 10 degrees to 90 degrees. The 
flapping velocities in the four steps are constant. In the first 
set of test, the flapping frequency is 0.25 Hz. In the second set 
of test, the flapping frequency is 0.5 Hz.  
Fig. 9 shows the results. The circles show the measured 
cruising speed in the first set of test. It is seen that with the 
increasing of flapping amplitude, the cruising speed increases 
2460
  
continuously from 5.1 mm/s to 58.6 mm/s. However, the 
increasing rate is not constant. The rate is larger when the 
flapping amplitude is less than 40 degrees. The blue curve 
shows the simulated cruising speed from the propulsion 
model. The simulation agrees well with the experiments. 
They have a similar trend, and the values are close. However, 
the measured speed is larger than the simulation constantly. 
The reason is manifold, including discrepancy in drag and lift 
coefficients, motion error, etc. In the simulation, the drag 
coefficient is 0.5, and the lift coefficient is 1.0. Also, in this 
cruising mode, a water jet is generated when the propulsors 
flap inward. This will yield an additional thrust, but is not 
considered in the propulsion model.  
When the flapping frequency is 0.5 Hz, with the increasing 
of flapping amplitudes, the cruising speed has a similar 
increasing trend. The cruising speed almost doubled as shown 
by the red squares. Such as when the flapping amplitude is 
30° , the speeds are 17.2 mm/s and 44.8 mm/s respectively, the 
ratio is 2.6; when the flapping amplitude is 90° , the speeds are 
58.6 mm/s and 99.7 mm/s respectively, the ratio is 1.7. For all 
the flapping amplitudes, the averaged ratio is 2.12. From the 
simulation, this ratio is 2.0. Or, the cruising speed is linearly 
related to the flapping frequency. Also, the measured speed is 
constantly larger than the simulated results. The reason is 
similar. It is noted that, when the flapping amplitude is close 
to 90° , the speed increase rate fluctuates significantly. One 
reason is the size of the tank is limited; a significant wave 
appears in the test. This affects the boat cruising a lot.  
 
Fig. 9 Cruising Performance of the Wire-Driven Double Hull Boat   
For both sets of tests, the cruising speed shows a similar 
trend with the increasing of flapping amplitude. Fig. 10 shows 
the increase rate. In the figure, the curves represent for the 
speed increment when the flapping amplitude is increased by 
1° . From the figure, at small flapping amplitude, with 1° 
increase of amplitude, the cruising speed increase rate is 
positive correlated to the flapping amplitude. The inflection 
point is 40° . Beyond this amplitude, the speed increment 
reduces. Especially at large flapping amplitude, the increment 
becomes steady. Therefore, from the energy saving point of 
view, the optimal flapping amplitude is 40° . In practice, the 
flapping amplitude can be in the range of 40° and 60° . 
 
Fig. 10 Cruising Speed Increase Rate w.r.t. Flapping Amplitude 
In the previous test, the flapping velocity is constant during 
the four steps. In the following test, the flapping velocities in 
step II and step IV are two times of the velocities in step I and 
step III. The flapping period is kept constant. This is named 
the fast and slow mode. The cruising speed is measured as 
previously. The results are summarized in Fig. 11. From the 
figure, by using the fast and slow scheme, the cruising speed 
of the boat is increased. When the flapping frequency is 0.25 
Hz, the average speed ratio of the two motion schemes is 
1.345. When the flapping frequency is 0.5 Hz, the average 
speed ratio is 1.093. In the experiment, when the propulsor 
flapping frequency is beyond 0.5 Hz, the water flow becomes 
turbulent, the flow bounce back from the walls and affects the 
boat cruising performance a lot. This is one reason why the 
speed ratio at higher flapping frequency is lower. 
 
Fig. 11 Cruising Performance Comparison of Two Motion Modes 
B. Turning Performance 
In the tests, three turning modes are tested. The boat is 
placed in still water and is then controlled to turn leftward. 
The width of the boat is 320 mm; the minimum space needed 
for flapping is 480 mm. However, the width of the tank is 
only 900 mm. Hence, in the turning test, the boat cannot turn a 
2461
  
full circle. The turning trajectory is recorded through the 
video frames, and the turning radius and turning speed is 
estimated from the trajectory.  The turning radius used here is 
the turning radius of the boat center, or the averaged turning 
radius of the two hulls. 
 
Fig. 12 Turning Performances of the Boat in the Three Turning Modes 
In the first turning mode, the two propulsors flap together, 
the flapping frequency is 0.5 Hz, and the flapping amplitudes 
are both 90° . In the flapping cycle, the velocities in the two 
steps are the same. The turning trajectory is as shown in Fig. 
12 (a). From the trajectory, the turning radius is about 800 
mm (2.30 BL), and turning speed is 4.2 ° /s. In the second 
turning mode, the left propulsor bends to the leftmost position, 
serving as a rudder. The right propulsor flaps as in Fig. 6 (b). 
The flapping amplitude is 90° , and the flapping frequency is 
0.5 Hz. The flapping velocities in the two steps are the same. 
The turning trajectory is as shown in Fig. 12 (b). The turning 
radius is about 180 mm (0.517 BL), and the turning speed is 
10.5 ° /s. In the third turning mode, similarly, the left 
propulsor bends to the leftmost position. The right propulsor 
flaps as in Fig. 6 (c). The flapping amplitude is 90° , and the 
flapping frequency is 0.5 Hz. The flapping velocities in the 
four steps are the same. The turning trajectory is as shown in 
Fig. 12 (c). The turning radius is about 300 mm (0.862 BL) 
and the turning speed is 13.9 ° /s. 
From the results, turning mode 2 has the minimum turning 
radius, while turning mode 3 has the largest turning speed. 
When the two propulsors flap together, the performance is 
inferior to using one propulsor as a rudder.  
VI. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a novel double-hull boat with two 
wire-driven flapping propulsors. Each propulsor contains 
seven joints, while is driven by one motor. The underactuated 
design greatly simplifies the structure and control. The joints 
rotations are confined by a uniform plastic caudal fin plate. 
During the flapping, all the joints rotations are nearly the 
same. A reactive propulsion model is developed for the 
double hull boat. Two cruising methods and three turning 
modes are introduced, which give guidance to the operation 
of flapping propelled double-hull boat. Experiment results 
show that, the double hull design improves the boat stability a 
lot. When the flapping frequency is low, the model predicts 
the cruising performance well. From the model, the optimal 
flapping amplitude is 40 degree. In the test, the maximum 
cruising speed is 0.323 BL/s, the minimum turning radius is 
0.517 BL, and the maximum turning speed is 13.9° /s.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Shipping and World Trade. Available: 
http://www.marisec.org/shippingfacts/keyfacts/  
[2] M. S. Triantafyllou and G. S. Triantafyllou, "An efficient swimming 
machine," Scientific american, vol. 272, pp. 64-71, 1995. 
[3] H. Hu, "Biologically Inspired Design of Autonomous Robotic Fish at 
Essex," Proceedings of the IEEE SMC UK-RI Chapter Conference 
2006 on Advancs in Cybernetic Systems, pp. 1-8, September 2006. 
[4] BUAA Robotic Fish. Available: 
http://news.buaa.edu.cn/dispnews.php?type=5&nid=1920&s_table=ne
ws_txt 
[5] J. Z. Yu, M. Tan, S. Wang, and E. Chen, "Development of a biomimetic 
robotic fish and its control algorithm," Ieee Transactions on Systems 
Man and Cybernetics Part B-Cybernetics, vol. 34, pp. 1798-1810, Aug 
2004. 
[6] Tai-robot-kun. Available: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=WINc1mV-L8Y 
[7] Firo Robotic Fish. Available: 
http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=OpTRaKBD6PY 
[8] O. Laser, "Fin propulsion boat," ed: Google Patents, 1982. 
[9] Proteus. Available: 
http://www.rbbi.com/folders/tech/product/penguin.htm#proteus1 
[10] Double hull boat. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Catamaran 
[11] Z. Li and R. Du, "Design and analysis of a biomimetic wire-driven 
flapping propeller," in Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics 
(BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS & EMBS International Conference on, 
2012, pp. 276-281. 
[12] Z. Li and R. Du, "Design and Analysis of a Bio-Inspired Wire-Driven 
Multi-Section Flexible Robot," Int J Adv Robotic Sy, vol. 10, 2013. 
[13] Z. Li, R. Du, M. C. Lei, and S. M. Yuan, "Design and Analysis of a 
Biomimetic Wire-Driven Robot Arm," in Proceedings of the ASME 
2011 International Mechanical Engineering Congress & Exposition, 
2011, pp. 11-17. 
[14] Z. Li, R. Du, Y. Zhang, and H. Li, "Robot Fish with Novel Wire-Driven 
Continuum Flapping Propulsor," Applied Mechanics and Materials, vol. 
300, pp. 510-514, 2013. 
[15] Z. Li, W. Gao, R. Du, and B. Liao, "Design and Analysis of a 
Wrie-Driven Robot Tadpole," in International Mechanical Engineering 
Congress & Exposition (IMECE 2012), Houston, Texas, USA, 2012. 
[16] B. Liao, Z. Li, and R. Du, "Robot Tadpole with a Novel Biomimetic 
Wire-driven Propulsor," presented at the IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO 2012), Guang Zhou, 
China, 2012. 
[17] Z. Li, R. Du, and Y. Yao, "Flying Octopus - A LTAV with Wire-Driven 
Flapping Wings," in International Mechanical Engineering Congress 
& Exposition (IMECE 2012), Houston, Texas, USA, 2012. 
[18] Z. Li and R. Du, "Design and implementation of a biomimetic 
wire-driven underactuated serpentine manipulator," Transaction on 
Control and Mechanical Systems, vol. 1, 2012. 
[19] Lighthil.Mj, "Large-Amplitude Elongated-Body Theory Of Fish 
Locomotion," Proceedings Of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences, 
vol. 179, pp. 125-+, 1971. 
2462
