A Comparison of SLAM Algorithms with Range Only Sensors
F. Herranz, A. Llamazares, E. Molinos, M. Oca÷ na
AbstractÑLocalizationandmappinginindoorenvironments,
such as airports and hospitals, are key tasks for almost every
robotic platform. Some researchers suggest the use of RO
(Range Only) sensors based on WiFi (Wireless Fidelity) tech-
nology with SLAM (Simultaneous Localization And Mapping)
techniques. The current state of the art in RO SLAM is
mainly focused on the Þltering approach, while the study of
smoothing approach with RO sensors is quite incomplete. This
paper presents a comparison between a Þltering algorithm,
the EKF, and a smoothing algorithm, the SAM (Smoothing
And Mapping). Experimental results are obtained, Þrst in
an outdoor environment using two types of RO sensors and
then in an indoor environment with WiFi sensors. The results
demonstrate the feasibility of the smoothing approach with
WiFi sensors in indoors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless networks and specially WiFi have become
widespread during the last years, especially in indoor en-
vironments. This makes WiFi a good choice to develop
SLAM systems in indoorswhereGPS does notprovidegood
results. In this work the SLAM systems are developed using
only range measurements. The RO sensors providethe range
measurements and a unique identiÞer per beacon, which
helps the SLAM avoid data association problem. However,
information about the angle is not obtained. So, with only
one range sample it is impossible to estimate a position. The
beacon could be anywhere within a ring of radius equal to
the range measurement.
Typically, WiFi localization systems use different map
representations of the environment. Most of them [1][2] use
Þngerprint maps based on the radiological patterns of the
signal. In contrast, other authors [3] use maps containing
the coordinates of all the beacons. In both cases building the
maps is an expensivetask thereforerecent studies focus their
efforts on SLAM techniques.
SLAM is considered to be a complex problem because
a robot simultaneously needs a consistent map to localize
itself, and an accurate estimate of its location to acquire
the map. During the last years a number of solutions have
been presentedto solvethe SLAM problemsuch as EKF [4],
FastSLAM [5], GraphSLAM [6] and Smoothing approaches
[7]. Although, SLAM is a well-studied problem with other
sensors, the state of the art in RO SLAM is not fully
explored. One of the most relevant works in RO SLAM is
[8] which combines EKF with a Relative Over Parametrized
(ROP) approach to solve the SLAM problem in outdoor
environments. The use of that parametrization derives from
F.Herranz, A.Llamazares, E.Molinos andM.Oca÷ naarewithDepartment
of Electronics, University of Alcala, 28871 Alcal« a de Henares, Madrid,
Spain {fernando.herranz,mocana}@depeca.uah.es
thepolarcoordinatesystemwhereannuli,crescentsandother
ring-like shapes can be easily modeled. Furthermore, the
authors have made public the dataset described in [9]. This
dataset is one of their main contributions because it allows
to test different algorithms with a common framework.
This paper focuses on a comparison of ROP-EKF with
the Smoothing approach (SAM) presented in [7] to improve
the state of the art in RO SLAM. Smoothing approaches for
SLAM add the entire trajectory of the robot and the map in
the estimation problem. While this seems counter-intuitive
at Þrst, because more variables are added to the problem,
the simpliÞcation arises from the fact that the smoothing
information matrix is naturally sparse. Therefore, smoothing
approaches provide an exact and efÞcient solution of the
problem.
Both algorithms are compared in the presented work
by using the database described in [9]. The comparison
demonstrates an improvement error rate of 20?40% for
SAM with respect to ROP-EKF performance. Furthermore,
an indoor WiFi setup is built to demonstrate the feasibility
of the SAM approach in indoor environments. This setup
consistsofalarge-scalebuildingunderrealconditions,which
means unexpected changes in the environment and people
wandering around, and it is also a contribution of this work.
The following sections of this paper are organized as
follows: section II describes the related work in this area;
section III studies the algorithms that are compared in this
work; section IV shows the datasets that have been used
and the experimental results; and Þnally, in section V some
conclusions and future work are presented.
II. RELATED WORK
Studies in RO SLAM identify two main problems to deal
with. The Þrst one consists in overcomingtheir lack of angle
information while the second one is referred to the way the
signal propagation is modeled. Both problems are specially
signiÞcant in indoor environments, where the environment
can change dynamically and the signal can be affected by
several interferences like multipath effect.
In order to overcome the lack of angle information some
works [10] use a two dimensional probability grid and a
voting system to provide estimates of the beacon loca-
tion. Other solutions [11] propose the use of FastSLAM
to estimate the initial position of the beacon. They also
replace the conventional EKFs for particle Þlters to avoid
the need of angle measurements. The idea is extended in
[12] maintaining independent Sum of Gaussians (SOGs) for
each beacon.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4606
Other works are focused on modeling the signal propaga-
tion which is specially complex in the presence of obstacles
such as buildings, walls or people. In [13] Ferris et. al.
use GPLVM (Gaussian Process Latent Variable Model) to
generate a likelihood model for signal strength measure-
ments which, in combination with an appropriate motion
dynamics model can be used to reconstruct a topological
connectivity graph from those measurements performing
efÞcient localization. However, it requires a large number
of beacons to obtain good results. In [14] the authors show
how wireless signal strength SLAM can be formulated as
a GraphSLAM problem modeling the signal propagation by
means of Gaussian interpolation weights to interpolate WiFi
signal strengths. GraphSLAM is a commonlyused technique
in the robotics community for simultaneously estimating a
trajectory and building a map. It shares many beneÞts of
Gaussian processes, but can be applied to a broader range of
environments, therefore improving the runtime complexity
from O(N
3
) to O(N
2
), where N is the dimensionality of
the state space.
III. RO SLAM COMPARISON
This section gives a brief description of the two SLAM
algorithms that are compared in this work. Both algorithms
are implemented following the original implementation by
the authors [8][7]. The Þrst, known as ROP-EKF [8], is
an extension of the standard EKF to formulate the SLAM
problem in polar coordinates. It has some drawbacks due to
its computational complexity. The second, known as SAM
[7], is based on smoothing approaches and factor graph
representation. It successfully applies sparse least-square
error minimization techniques to solve the so-called full
SLAM problem i.e. the problem of estimating the entire
trajectory of the robot with the map.
A. ROP-EKF
Typical EKF SLAM is based on an important character-
istic which establishes that any information that helps to
computetheposteriorof therobotis also propagatedthrough
the map. As a result, it improves the localization of other
landmarks in the map. In other words, observing a landmark
improves the robots pose estimate decreasing some of the
uncertainty of landmarks previously seen by the same robot.
This dependence is captured in the Gaussian posterior, more
speciÞcally, in the off-diagonal covariance elements of the
matrix ?
t
. This effect is one of the main advantages of
EKF SLAM techniques, because this behavior is implicitly
modeled in the EKF itself.
Since most of the uncertainty in earlier landmarks is
related to the robotÕs pose, and this uncertainty persists
over time, the location estimates of those landmarks are
correlated. When gaining information on the robotÕs pose,
this information spreads to previously observed landmarks.
However, it is well known that EKF becomes practically
intractable when managing the covariance matrix ?
t
due to
the fact that this matrix is non-sparse. The computational
complexity is O(N
2
) where N is the number of landmark
and grows quadratically. Moreover, EKF has been shown to
be inconsistent when applied to non-linear problems as it is.
The basic formulation of EKF SLAM assumes that the
location of features in the map is fully observable from a
single position of the robot. The method has been extended
to situations with partial observability like RO sensors [15].
Thus, the ROP-EKF extends the standard EKF to work with
RO sensors by means of a Relative Over Parametrization.
It formulates the problem in polar coordinates where ring-
shapes can be easily modeled and parametrizes the state
relative to an origin. The state vector is deÞned as (1) shows.
q
t
=

q
r
t
,q
1
t
,q
2
t
,...,q
N
t

T
(1)
Where q
r
t
=

c
r
x,t
,c
r
y,t
,r
r
t
,?
r
t
,?
r
t

denotes the robot pose
at time t being (c
r
x,t
,c
r
y,t
) the origin of the polar coordinate
frame,(r
r
t
,?
r
t
)therangeandanglevaluesand?
r
t
theheading
of the robot. q
i
t
=

c
i
x,t
,c
i
y,t
,r
i
t
,?
i
t

corresponds to the
position of the i-th landmark.
As RO sensors present multimodal distributions this ap-
proach uses a multi-hypothesis representation of the EKF
to maintain those distributions. Hence, ROP-EKF is able to
model the situations when the annulus-like prior distribution
is split into separate modes because a second RO measure-
ment is obtained.
B. Smoothing And Mapping (SAM)
Smoothing approaches are presented as efÞcient alter-
natives to the EKF framework for the SLAM problem.
These methods propose the use of factor graphs [16] and
optimization techniquesto smooth the trajectory of the robot
and the map. Thus, these approachesobtain the best possible
trajectory and map for the given measurements.
One of the main characteristics of these approachs is to
address the full SLAM problem so the complete trajectory
of the robot is added into the estimation problem. From the
point of view of the EKF this could seem as a disadvantage
because more variables are added to the estimation problem.
However, smoothing approaches take advantage of the fact
that the smoothing information matrix I is naturally sparse
in contrast to the covariance matrix of the EKF.
Moreover, smoothing deals with non-linear SLAM prob-
lems much better than Þltering approaches by controlling
in which region the linearization can be trusted while the
linearization choices cannot be undone in Þltering. Hence,
the SLAM is solved as an optimization problem which is
formulated in terms of sparse linear algebra, and becomes a
fast alternative to EKF factorizing into square root form the
matrixI and the measurementJacobianA. So, this approach
fully exploits the sparseness of both matrices being its
computational complexity linear O(M+N), which depends
on the number of poses M and the number of landmarksN.
Nevertheless, its performance depends on choosing a good
variable reordering when factorizing the matrix.
The SAM approach recovers the maximum a posteriori
(MAP) estimate for the entire tarjectory X , {x
i
} and the
map L , {l
j
}, given the measurements Z , {z
k
} and
4607
control inputs U , {u
i
} by solving the non-linear least-
squares problem shown in (2)
M
X
i=1
kx
i
?f
i
(x
i?1
,u
i
)k
2
?i
+
K
X
k=1
kz
k
?h
k
(x
i
k
,l
jk
)k
2
?
k
(2)
If the process models f
i
and the measurement equations
h
k
are non-linear, as they are in this work, and a good
linearization point is not available, non-linear optimization
methods are able to approach a minimum solving a suc-
cession of linear approximations to (2). Typically, Gauss-
Newton iterations or Levenberg-Marquardtmethodsare used
to solve the optimization problem.
Since SAM approach solves optimization problems, SAM
is able to work with RO sensors without any modiÞcation.
SAM only needs to deÞne the RO measurements between
the landmarks and the mobile as Òrange factorsÓ.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section presents an experimental validation of
both algorithms for different types of RO sensors.
First, it shows the results that are obtained using the
public database of the Robotics Institute of Carnegie
Mellon University [9], which can be downloaded from
www.frc.ri.cmu.edu/projects/emergencyresponse/RangeData/.
Second, it shows the results of a real WiFi indoor scenario
that is set up at the University of Alcal« a.
A. Carnegie Mellon RO sensors Database Results
The Carnegie Mellon database has several scenarios set
up in an outdoor environment to validate the correct perfor-
manceofbothalgorithms.Althoughtheoutdoorenvironment
simpliÞes the problem because no external interferences
appear, it provides a good test-bench to compare both al-
gorithm. The SAM results are compared with respect to the
results obtained by the ROP-EKF in [8] and [17].
The database consists of Þve different paths using two
types of RO sensors (Pinpoint RF and ultra-wide band
sensors). Table I shows the name of every experiment, the
sensor that was used, the covered distance by the robot, the
number of range samples that were collected and a brief
description of the experiment.
The experiments were designed to test a wide number of
possible situations such as long and short paths, different
heading errors and random trials. Moreover, the use of two
typesofsensorsallowstheauthorsto testthealgorithmswith
different noise conÞgurations because RF sensor is noisier
than the UWB (UltraWide Band) one.
Table II presents the results for both algorithmsevaluating
thepath and map error,which arecomputedas theEuclidean
distance between the estimated and groudtruth values. The
ROP-EKFrowshowstheresultspresentedin [8] forGesling.
The results for the Plaza dataset were published in [17]
which only provides the error for the Þnal 10% of the path.
However, the SAM results that we have obtained providethe
error for the complete path, which are more realistic results.
In terms of path error Table II demonstrates that SAM
performs better than ROP-EKF for the whole dataset. It is
shown that the SAM obtains an improvement error rate of
20?40% with respect to ROP-EKF performance. Moreover,
both algorithms are able to manage the Gaussian noise of
the sensors. The results are not affected by the amount
of Gaussian noise because the mean path error is similar
in experiments with the same conÞguration (Gesling1 wrt
Plaza2 and Gesling2 wrt Plaza1). However, the different
path conÞgurationsaffectdirectly to the performanceof both
algorithms. The paths that highlight the effect of heading
error by turning in the same direction repeatedly get worse
results than the other ones, which is intuitive.
In terms of map error, Table II shows that SAM performs
better than ROP-EKF except when the path is not long
enough to properly Þnd a minimum in the optimization
process.
To summarize, this section demonstrates the feasibility of
the SAM algorithmwhen workingwith RO sensors in a con-
trolled outdoor environment without external interferences.
SAM can be considered as a better alternative than ROP-
EKF for RO SLAM due to the fact that it obtains better
results in most of the experiments.
B. Alcal« a WiFi Database Results
The Alcal« a WiFi database, which is available at
www.robesafe.es/repository/UAHWiFiDataset/, has several
scenarios set up to verify the feasibility of both algorithms
in indoor environments. The experiments were tested at the
University of Alcal« a under real conditions which means
people wandering around, small changes in the environment,
small interferences due to portable devices, etc.
WiFi technology has been used in these experiments
because most of the buildings provide this network. Since it
is pre-installed there is no need to modify the environment
and the use of WiFi frequency (2.4 GHz) is free. However,
this technology is noisier than the previous ones because
WiFi is affected by every object that contains water and
the multipath effect. Hence, it can suffer variations in the
power strength up to 10 dBm which means an error in
the distance measurement up to 25 meters in some of
the cases. Moreover, the non Gaussian noise presented in
this technology makes it difÞcult to model these variations.
Therefore, these conditions increase the difÞculty of the
experiments and it is a real challenge for both algorithms.
Figure 1 shows the environments that have been used in
this dataset. Figure 1(a) shows the third ßoor of the building
which has a size of 120x120 meters. This environment
consists of four large corridors forming a square in which
a landmark is placed in every corner. Figure 1(b) shows
the west area of the second ßoor, the size of this area is
60x60 meters. There are four small corridors which are 18
meters long and a main corridor of 35 meters that Þnishes
in a hall. The hall is an semi-empty space only occupied by
two elevators. Although there is a large number of Access
Points (up to 150) in the environments, which are used as
landmarks, the experiments only take into account the most
important ones for simplicity. The landmarks are considered
to be important based on their spacial distribution. The
4608
TABLE I
CARNEGIEMELLON DATASETDESCRIPTION
Name Sensor Distance (m) # range samples Description
Gesling1 RF 3700 2,565 Effect of heading error by turning in the same direction repeatedly.
Gesling2 RF 1360 1,416 Minimizes the effect of heading error by balancing the heading turns.
Gesling3 RF 6700 10,068 Long random trial.
Plaza1 UWB 1900 3,529 Minimizes the effect of heading error by balancing the heading turns.
Plaza2 UWB 6700 1,816 Effect of heading error by turning in the same direction repeatedly.
TABLE II
CARNEGIE MELLON RO SENSORSDATABASERESULTS
Method Gesling1 Gesling2 Gesling3 Plaza1 Plaza2
Path Map Path Map Path Map Path Map Path Map
ROP EKF 0.97m 0.57m 0.78m 0.53m 0.83m 0.62m 0.65m
1
0.48m
1
0.87m
1
0.48m
1
SAM 0.59m 0.56m 0.47m 1.14m 0.66m 0.47m 0.51m 0.77m 0.61m 0.45m
data was collected with a Seekur Jr. of MobileRobot which
providedtheodometrymeasurementsand an on boardlaptop
to obtain the RO measurements.
Sincetheexperimentswereplacedinindoorenvironments,
a reliable groundtruth was not available. Hence, a visual
inspection was chosen to evaluate the results. Figures 1(a)
and 1(b) show the true trajectory of the robot (blue line) and
where the landmarks were placed (blue stars).
Table III presents a brief description of the experiments.
Two experiments have been designed in order to study
the same cases that in the Carnegie Mellon ones. A new
experiment also has been added to study the effect of high
noise in the odometry measurements. Table III also shows
thatthecovereddistancebytherobotis longenoughtostudy
that conditionsin indoor environments.Alcala1 is performed
at Environment1 (Figure 1(a)) while Alcala 2 and Alcala3
are performed at Environment2 (Figure 1(b)).
Figure2 showstheresultsforAlcala1dataset.Theodome-
try path is shownin green,theestimated path is shown in red
and the estimated landmarks are shown as black stars. This
experiment studies the effect of heading error by turning in
the same direction repeatedly. The ROP-EKF (Figure 2(a))
is not able to recover the square shape that the groundtruth
draws and it fails to estimate the landmarks. The SAM
(Figure2(b))recoversthesquareshapealthoughitisaffected
by a rotation. The landmarks are well placed with respect to
the estimated trajectory.
Figure 3 shows the results for Alcala2 dataset. The exper-
iment minimizes the effect of heading error by balancing the
heading turns. Both algorithms obtain similar results when
the robot does not turn always in the same direction and the
odometry is accurate enough.
Figure 4 shows the results for Alcala3 dataset. This
experiment shows the effect of high noise in the odometry
measurements. This is the worst possible scenario because
none of the measurements (odometry and RO) are reliable
enough. The ROP-EKF is not able to converge to any
solution and the results are not valuable. The SAM is still
1
These errors only take into account the Þnal 10% of the path
able to estimate the trajectory of the robot and the map
obtaining similar results to Alcala2 ones. This behavior is a
consequence of the use of optimization techniques because
they controls in which region the linearization is trusted. So,
SAM can be considered as a more robust solution for this
kind of environments.
Finally, it is important to remark that the performance of
SAM with respect to ROP-EKF is much better in the Alcal« a
database than in the Carnegie Mellon one. This is due to the
fact that in outdoor environments the noise of RO sensors
are easily modeled while in indoor environments WiFi is
affectedbyseveralvariations.Hence,ROP-EKFÞndsitmore
difÞcult to obtain a good estimation in indoor environments.
In addition, the performance of the SLAM algorithms can
be compare with traditional WiFi localization methods such
as the one presented in [18]. Where it is compare than both
techniques obtain similar results.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work two different SLAM approaches have been
compared, the ROP-EKF and the SAM, to solve the RO
SLAM problem. The theoretical advantages of SAM with
respect to EKF have been presented. Moreover,experimental
results with real data demonstrate the effectiveness of SAM
approachinoutdoors.Animprovementerrorrateof20?40%
with respect to ROP-EKF has been obtained. Furthermore,
bothalgorithmshavebeentestedinarealindoorenvironment
with WiFi sensors. The feasibility of RO SLAM techniques
in that environment has been demonstrated showing a re-
markable improvement of the SAM approach with respect
to the ROP-EKF one. In the near future we will use an
incremental variant of SAM, known as iSAM, to solve the
online SLAM problem.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been funded by TIN2011-29824-C02-01
andTIN2011-29824-C02-02(ABSYNTHE Project) fromthe
ÓMinisterio de Econom« õa y CompetitividadÓ.
4609
*
*
*
*
(a) Environment1
* *
*
*
*
(b) Environment2
Fig. 1. Alcal« a Environments
TABLE III
ALCALA DATASETDESCRIPTION
Name Sensor Distance (m) # range samples Description
Alcala1 WiFi 533 490 Effect of heading error by turning in the same direction repeatedly.
Alcala2 WiFi 821 568 Minimizes the effect of heading error by balancing the heading turns.
Alcala3 WiFi 937 785 Effect of high noise in the odometry measurements.
GT
Odom
ROP-EKF
Landmarks
*
(a) Alcala1. ROP-EKF
GT
Odom
SAM
Landmarks
*
(b) Alcala1. SAM
Fig. 2. Alcala1 results
REFERENCES
[1] P. Bahl and V. Padmanabhan, ÒRadar: A, in-building rf-based user
location and tracking system,Ó in Proc. of the IEEE Infocom, 2000,
pp. 775Ð784.
[2] M. Oca÷ na, L. M. Bergasa, M.
«
A. Sotelo, R. F. Flores, D. F.
Llorca, and D. Schleicher, ÒAutomatic training method applied to
a WiFi+ultrasound POMDP navigation system,Ó Robotica, vol. 27,
no. 07, pp. 1049Ð1061, December 2009.
[3] V. Matell« an, J. M. Ca÷ nas, and O. Serrano, ÒWiÞ localization methods
for autonomous robots,Ó Robotica, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 455Ð461, 2006.
[4] S. Thrun, W. Burgard, and D. Fox, Probabilistic Robotics (Intelligent
Robotics and Autonomous Agents), 2001.
[5] M. Montemerlo, S. Thrun, D. Koller, and B. Wegbreit, ÒFastSLAM: A
factored solution to the simultaneous localization and mapping prob-
lem,Ó in Proceedings of the AAAI National Conference on ArtiÞcial
Intelligence. Edmonton, Canada: AAAI, 2002.
[6] S. Thrun and M. Montemerlo, ÒThe GraphSLAM algorithm with
applications to large-scale mapping of urban structures,Ó International
Journal on Robotics Research, vol. 25, no. 5/6, pp. 403Ð430, 2005.
[7] F. Dellaert and M. Kaess, ÒSquare root sam: Simultaneous localization
and mapping via square root information smoothing,Ó I. J. Robotic
Res., vol. 25, no. 12, pp. 1181Ð1203, 2006.
[8] J. Djugash and S. Singh, ÒA robust method of localization and map-
ping using only range,Ó in International Symposium on Experimental
Robotics, July 2008.
[9] J. Djugash, B. Hamner, and S. Roth, ÒNavigating with ranging radios:
Five datasets with groundtruth,Ó Journal of Field Robotics, p. 2009.
[10] J. Djugash, S. Singh, and P. Corke, ÒFurther results with localization
and mapping using range from radio,Ó in International Conference on
Field & Service Robotics (FSR Õ05), July 2005.
4610
GT
Odom
ROP-EKF
Landmarks
*
(a) Alcala2. ROP-EKF
GT
Odom
SAM
Landmarks
*
(b) Alcala2. SAM
Fig. 3. Alcala2 results
GT
Odom
ROP-EKF
Landmarks
*
(a) Alcala3. ROP-EKF
GT
Odom
SAM
Landmarks
*
(b) Alcala3. SAM
Fig. 4. Alcala3 results
[11] J.-L. Blanco, J. Gonz« alez, and J.-A. Fern« andez-Madrigal, ÒA pure
probabilistic approach to range-only slam,Ó in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRAÕ08), May 2008, pp.
1436Ð1441.
[12] J. L. Blanco, J. A. Fernandez-Madrigal, and J. Gonzalez, ÒEfÞcient
probabilistic range-only slam,Ó in Proceedings of IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROSÕ08), 2008,
pp. 1017Ð1022.
[13] B. Ferris, D.Fox, and N. Lawrence, ÒWiÞ-slam using gaussian process
latent variable models,Ó in In Proceedings of IJCAI 2007, 2007, pp.
2480Ð2485.
[14] J. Huang, D. Millman, M. Quigley, D. Stavens, S. Thrun, and
A. Aggarwal, ÒEfÞcient, generalized indoor wiÞ graphslam,Ó in ICRA.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 1038Ð1043.
[15] E. Olson, J. Leonard, and S. Teller, ÒRobust range-only beacon
localization,Ó in in Proceedings of Autonomous Underwater Vehicles,
2004, pp. 66Ð75.
[16] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, ÒFactor graphs and
the sum-product algorithm,Ó IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMA-
TION THEORY, vol. 47, pp. 498Ð519, 1998.
[17] J. Djugash, ÒGeolocation with range: Robustness, efÞciency and
scalability,Ó Ph.D. dissertation, Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA, November 2010.
[18] F.Herranz, M.Ocana, L.Bergasa, M.Sotelo, D.Llorca, N.Hern« andez,
A. Llamazares, and C. Fern« andez, ÒStudying of wiÞ range-only sensor
and its application to localization and mapping systems,Ó in IEEE
ICRA 2010 Workshops, 2010, pp. 115Ð120.
4611
