A Passive, Origami-Inspired, Continuously Variable Transmission
Samuel M. Felton
1
, Dae-Young Lee
2
, Kyu-Jin Cho
2
, and Robert J. Wood
1
Abstract— Transmissions play a vital role in machines by
transforming the torque and speed of a motor into a desired
output. They are often necessary for operating a motor at peak
efﬁciency or power. The majority of variable transmissions
are mechanically complex, large, and expensive, which limits
scalability and is often cost prohibitive. As an alternative, we
propose an origami-wheel design that is capable of varying its
own transmission ratio between motor torque and ground reac-
tion force, effectively creating a passive, continuously variable
transmission. The wheel responds to an increase in torque by
reducing its radius through the spring-like properties of the
origami structure, increasing the force applied by the wheel to
the ground. We demonstrate that the wheel is able to match
the speed of a 55 mm ﬁxed-radius wheel when unloaded, and
can also tow loads as high as a 25 mm wheel without stalling.
This design could be used to provide smaller, cheaper robots
with an effective means to vary their output while maintaining
motor efﬁciency.
I. INTRODUCTION
The transmission is a necessary component of any ma-
chine; it transforms the power input from an actuator into
the desired output by altering the speed and force. Traditional
variable transmissions enable machines to operate efﬁciently
at a wide range of speeds while allowing the actuator to
operate close to peak power or efﬁciency, and for this reason
can be found in many wheeled vehicles. The most common
types of automobile transmissions are mechanically complex,
and consist of a torque converter, a planetary gear train, and a
hydraulic or manual controller [1]. Each of these components
comprises many parts, making them large and expensive.
These transmissions have a ﬁnite number of ratios, so they
cannot operate at peak performance through a continuous
range of speeds. In order to improve efﬁciency, automobile
manufacturers have experimented with continuously variable
transmissions (CVTs), which have an inﬁnite number of
transmission ratios, sometimes over an inﬁnite range, using
mechanical, hydraulic, or electrical controllers [1], [2], [3],
[4], [5]. While sometimes more efﬁcient, these systems
are still mechanically complex, and have yet to replace
traditional transmissions in many vehicles due to their larger
size, higher cost, and/or lack of durability. In smaller or less
expensive vehicles such as wheeled robots, these disadvan-
tages make any kind of variable gearing prohibitive.
In order to reduce cost and complexity, we looked to
develop a passive control system to vary the transmission
1
Samuel Felton and Robert Wood are with the School of Engineering and
Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA, and
the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. sam@seas.harvard.edu
2
Dae-Young Lee and Kyu-Jin Cho are with the School of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Gwanak 1 Gwanak-ro,
Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Korea winter2nf@gmail.com
High speed, low force
Low speed, high force
Fig. 1. The origami-inspired wheel passively adjusts the torque-force
transmission ratio by altering its radius in response to a tangential load.
ratio. Passive devices integrate mechanical intelligence into
machine design in lieu of a distinct control system, and have
been implemented at a variety of scales: a windshield wiper
blade distributes an applied force across six points while be-
ing driven by a single rotary linkage, micro-air vehicles such
as the Harvard Microrobotic Fly rely on passive wing rotation
to achieve an optimal wing angle and maximize thrust [6],
[7], and a transformable wheel can passively deploy or retract
legs in order to adapt to smooth or rough terrain, using only
external friction [8]. Passive mechanisms are also utilized in
some cases because they behave more quickly and accurately.
The differential mechanism in an automobile balances the
torques applied to different wheels driven by the same motor,
allowing them to rotate independently while simultaneously
aiding in traction [6]. All of these devices rely on clever
mechanical design to tighten the dynamic feedback loop.
In order to develop a new, passive CVT, we looked to
harness the intrinsic mechanical properties of folded struc-
tures. Origami has inspired a variety of mechanisms that are
less expensive and/or perform better than more traditional
devices, including actuators [9] and springs [10]. Labor and
material costs are reduced by harnessing two-dimensional
materials and fabrication methods. These devices utilize fold
geometry and material bending properties to extract signiﬁ-
cant function out of apparently simple designs. Entire robotic
platforms have been constructed using these techniques [11],
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2913
[12], [13], [14], [15]. Particularly relevant to our goals, Lee
et al. have demonstrated a suite of folding wheels actuated
by shape memory alloy wire that can change shape in order
to adapt to different environments [16], [17].
In this paper we demonstrate that origami-inspired wheels
can be utilized passively to effect a continuously variable
transmission (Fig. 1). This design responds to a changing tan-
gential load by changing its radius, acting as a continuously
variable transmission ratio between input torque and output
force. We demonstrate the performance of these wheels by
incorporating them into a machine towing varying loads, and
compare it to ﬁxed wheeled designs.
II. DESIGN
The origami wheel design consists of a polyester (PET)
dodecagon with twelve fold lines extending to each vertex
and tangent to an internal core of radius R
i
(Fig. 2a). These
lines are folded in opposite directions, resulting in faces
whose normal vector is approximately orthogonal to the
original plane of the paper and the wheel axis. This design
is geometrically similar to the one used by Lee et al. [16].
When a torque is applied to the wheel and an oppos-
ing shear force applied to the wheel edge, an equivalent
bending moment is applied to each radial face, causing that
face to wrap around the core. A larger torque results in
more bending, which decreases the effective radius of the
wheel. The decreased radius, in turn, results in an increased
transmission ratio between wheel torque and corresponding
tangential force. The fold pattern maintains continuity of the
outer edge of the wheel and ensures that all of the faces fold
together, so that the wheel maintains a more circular shape
than a set of unconnected, radial spring plates would.
Spring steel plates are attached to each face in order to
increase stiffness. These plates are shaped to form a triangle
whose width is 1/3 of the PET face width, and is truncated to
70 mm length in order to prevent interference at the core of
the wheel (Fig. 2b). Acrylic plates are attached to the core of
the wheel on both sides to maintain rigidity and couple with
a motor shaft (Fig. 2c). These plates have a slightly smaller
X
12
X
2
(a) (b)
(c)
R
i
 
20 mm
70
mm
37
mm
L 
80 mm
W
52 mm
w
s
17 mm
Fig. 2. A drawing of the components of the origami wheel. (a) A dodecagon
is cut out of PET, with 12 perforated fold lines. R
i
is the core radius, L is
the length of the bending faces, and W is the width of each face at the outer
edge. (b) 12 steel plates are cut and adhered to the 12 faces of the wheel.
w
s
is the width of the steel plate at the outer edge of the wheel.(c) The core
of the wheel is sandwiched between two acrylic plates to provide rigidity
and enable coupling to the motor shaft.
R
R
s
(d)
F
F
?
R
(c)
?
F
(a) (b)
W
L
w(d)
d
?
1
Fig. 3. (a) Each face (red) experiences a bending momentt and a tangential
reaction force F. The moment causes the beam to bend and wrap around
the core (gray). (b) Each face of the wheel is modeled as a beam with a
variable width w dependent on the distance d from its interior end. The
total length of the face is L, and the maximum width is W. This face
exhibits a variable curvature r when under load. (c) Free body diagram of
the wheel undergoing a drag force and reaction ground force, as well as
a moment. The bending moment is spread between all faces, so that each
face follows the same curve, resulting in an effective radius R of the wheel.
(d) A logarithmic spiral (blue) and the path of a single face of the origami
wheel (red). The face is constrained to a maximum curvature by the core
of the wheel, indicated by the dotted line. However, the maximum radii of
both curves (R
s
and R) are approximately equal.
diameter than the core of the origami pattern in order to
avoid interference with the fold pattern.
III. MODEL
The model of the origami wheel assumes that the primary
mode of deformation contributing to wheel stiffness is the
bending of the faces tangentially to the core (Fig. 3a). Each
face is modeled as a beam whose width w increases linearly
as a function of the distance d along the length of the face
(Fig. 3b). Each plate’s local bending stiffness k
f
can be
calculated by treating the face as a composite of the steel
and PET layers, and the total stiffness k of the wheel is
assumed to be due to the 12 faces of the wheel bending in
parallel so that k = 12k
f
(Fig. 3c). Because k is dependent
on w
k(d)= k
0
w(d)= k
0
W
d
L
(1)
where k
0
is the stiffness per unit width, W is the maximum
width of the face, and L is the total length of the face. When
a bending moment is applied, the face exhibits a curvature
r, calculated as
r =
t
k
=
tL
k
0
Wd
(2)
2914
that is inversely proportional to d. Therefore, the curve of
the beam is similar to that of a logarithmic spiral [18], which
can be expressed in cylindrical coordinates as
r = ae
bq
(3)
where a and b are coefﬁcients deﬁning the spiral, and whose
arc length s is inversely proportional to its curvature r
s
. In
cylindrical coordinates, the radial coordinate of this spiral
can be expressed as a function of arc length
r(s)=
sb
p
1+ b
2
(4)
The curvature of a logarithmic spiral is given as
r
s
=
1
sb
(5)
and we assume that r =r
s
and s = d, so that eqs. 2 and 5
can be combined to solve for b.
b=
k
0
W
tL
(6)
The maximum radius R
s
of the spiral with a total arc length
s= L is deﬁned as R
s
= r(L), and we assume that the radius
of the wheel R R
s
(Fig. 3d). This approximation was
veriﬁed to be accurate to within 2% by numerical analysis,
given the parameter values used in this paper and over the
range of torques the motors were capable of producing.
t is equal to the ground reaction force F multiplied by R,
which can be expressed as a function of b.
t = FR=
FbL
p
1+ b
2
(7)
Eqs. 6 and 7 can be combined to solve for the torque
explicitly:
t =
v
u
u
u
t
 

k
0
W
L

2
+
r

k
0
W
L

4
+ 4(k
0
WF)
2
2
(8)
From here, the radius, radial velocity, and vehicle speed can
be calculated. The transmission ratio T R between ground
force and torque is simply the inverse of the radius.
T R=
v
u
u
u
t
2F
2
 

k
0
W
L

2
+
r

k
0
W
L

4
+ 4(k
0
WF)
2
(9)
When applying this model to predicting vehicle speed, we
assume that the drag load is equal to 2F, the motors are
under a constant voltage, and that there is an inverse linear
relationship between motor torque and angular velocity, so
that
w =w
max

1 
t
t
max

(10)
The values used for these calculations are shown in table I,
and the resulting models are included in ﬁgures 5 and 6.
TABLE I
VALUES USED TO MODEL WHEEL STIFFNESS AND VEHICLE SPEED
Face length L 80 mm
Core radius R
i
20 mm
PET Young’s modulus E
p
3 GPa
PET thickness t
p
125 mm
Maximum PET width W 52 mm
Steel Young’s modulus E
s
207 GPa
Steel thickness t
s
50 mm
Maximum steel width w
s
17 mm
Speciﬁc stiffness k’ 45.2 mN-m
Motor stall torque t
max
50 mN-m
Motor free speed w
max
12 rad/s
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
The effective stiffness of the wheel was measured by
applying a point load to the edge of the wheel, in the form of
a hook and mass (Fig. 4). Three separate measurements were
taken at each load by applying the mass to three different
points along the wheel. The effective radius was measured
from the center of the wheel to the edge closest to the applied
mass. A picture was taken for each measurement, and the
distance was measured using ImageJ analysis software.
In order to measure the effect of wheel design on vehicle
speed, three different sets of wheels were produced: The
origami-inspired design, as well as large and small ﬁxed-
radius wheels for experimental controls. The large wheels
were 6.4 mm wide and had a radius of 55 mm, and were
used as a reference for the maximum speed of the origami
wheel. The small wheels, 12.7 mm wide and 25 mm in
radius, acted as a reference for the maximum load. These
widths were chosen to match the mass of the control wheels
to that of the origami wheels while also preventing slippage.
Sandpaper was applied to the edge of all wheels in order
to increase friction and prevent slippage between the wheels
and the ground. A chassis was used for testing that consisted
of an acrylic frame, two electric motors (100-1 Micro Metal
Gearmotor, Pololu) 170 mm apart, a controller (Uno R3,
Arduino), and motor shield (Motor/Stepper/Servo Shield for
Arduino, Adafruit) to drive the motors. The controller and
motor shield were powered by separate batteries (2S 120mAh
(a) (b)
50 mm
Fig. 4. The effective stiffness of the origami wheel was measured by
applying a point load to the edge. (a) The unloaded wheel. (b) The wheel
loaded with 200 g.
2915
20C LiPo, E-ﬂite) with a measured output ranging from 8.0
to 8.3 V . In order to simulate a varying drag load, a folder
was attached to the chassis at two points 130 mm behind the
motors, and loaded with paper to adjust friction between the
folder and the carpet (Fig. 1).
All speed experiments were run on carpet over a distance
of two meters, and speed was measured via video recording
with a digital camera (Powershot A1100 IS, Canon). Motors
were run at a constant voltage. The drag load was varied by
increments of 0.4 N, from 0.1 N to 2.9 N. Five samples were
run at each load for each wheel conﬁguration.
V. FABRICATION
The Origami wheel consists primarily of 125 mm thick
PET. Fold lines were perforated in the PET, and folded by
hand. 50mm spring steel was cut with a table-mounted paper
cutter and attached to the PET using acrylic tape (Scotch
926 High Performance, 3M). 18.5 mm radius plates were
cut from 3.2 mm acrylic and attached to the core via screws
in order to maintain rigidity of the core and allow motor
attachment via press ﬁtting. The chassis was cut from 3.2
mm acrylic, and the ﬁxed-radius wheels were cut from 6.4
mm acrylic. Unless otherwise noted, all cuts were made
with a commercial CO2 laser machining system (VLS 2.3,
Universal Laser Systems).
VI. RESULTS
The measured and modeled stiffnesses of the origami
wheel are shown in ﬁgure 5 by plotting the effective radius as
a function of tangential load. The actual stiffness was higher
than expected. This may be due to the additional sources of
energy storage in the wheel geometry. For instance, the faces
undergo twisting as well as bending as they wrap around
the core, which would make the wheel effectively stiffer. In
addition, the model treats our faces as an ideal composite
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
0.1
force (N)
Radius (m)
 
 
Measured
Modeled
Fig. 5. The measured and modeled radii of the origami wheel as a function
of a tangential force on the wheel’s edge. The radius represents the inverse
of the transmission ratio from the motor torque to the ground force. Each
load was applied to the wheel separately at three different points along its
edge for three independent measurements. Error bars indicate the standard
deviation of the measured radius.
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Speed (m/s)
Drag load (N)
 
 
Origami?Model
Origami?Experimental
55 mm
25 mm
Fig. 6. The speed of the test machine utilizing each wheel as a function of
drag load, as well as the modeled speed expected from the origami wheel.
Five trials were measured for each load and wheel design. Error bars indicate
the standard deviation of the measured speed. Some error bars are too small
to be visible.
for the purposes of calculating area moment, but in fact, the
adhesive between the two layers may affect this moment.
Finally, the deformed wheel did not maintain a perfectly
circular edge, but instead deformed more near the load point,
so the assumption of equal displacement of all 12 faces may
result in some inaccuracy.
The measured speed of the test machine utilizing each
wheel is shown as a function of drag load in ﬁgure 6. The
ﬁxed-radius wheels performed as expected, demonstrating an
approximately linear relation between load and speed. One
notable exception to this trend is that the smaller wheels
began to slip at a load of 2.5 N, resulting in a smaller
maximum load and greater standard deviation than was
expected.
The origami wheel demonstrated a speed equivalent to the
larger ﬁxed-radius wheel at the minimum load of 0.1 N. At
higher loads, it exhibited speeds more similar to those of the
smaller wheel (see Supp. Video). It stalled at a load of 2.9 N,
the same as the smaller wheel. It also exhibited some amount
of slipping at loads of 0.5 N and higher, which contributed
to the origami wheels’ underperformance at loads between
0.5 N and 1.3 N compared to the 55 mm wheel. Overall,
the origami wheel performed as well as the faster of the two
ﬁxed-radius wheels at every load except 0.5 N and 0.9 N,
and never performed worse than both.
The model overestimated the speed at lower loads, and
underestimated it at higher loads. The difference between
the model and experiments at low loads can be explained
by slippage, which our model did not take into account.
Greater slippage at higher speed is likely because the contact
area between the wheel and the ground is smaller. When
the wheel is expanded, the effective width of the wheel is
not much greater than the thickness of the PET; while the
wheel is contracted, the width is equal to the maximum face
width (Fig. 7). At higher loads, the difference between the
2916
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 7. As the radius of the wheel decreases, the effective width and
traction of the wheel increase. Pictured here are the side (a) and front (b)
views of the wheel in its relaxed state and under no load, as well as the
side (c) and front (d) views of the wheel at its minimum radius when the
motors are exerting their stall torque.
model and the data may be due to a more complex force-
displacement proﬁle than the model accounted for, or gravity
may be causing additional deformation, resulting in a smaller
wheel and a more advantageous force-torque ratio.
For further comparison, we installed the origami wheels
backwards and then measured the machine’s unloaded speed.
When the wheels are run in reverse, the tangential force
pushes the wheels open so that they hold a maximum radius.
When run this way, the machine moved at a speed of
0.80.02 m/s. If this wheel is in a conﬁguration where it can
be utilized in reverse, this technique can be used to achieve
an even greater range of speeds.
VII. DISCUSSION
The origami wheel demonstrated speeds equivalent to the
larger ﬁxed-radius wheel when unloaded, but was able to
output up to 90% more force without stalling. These results
indicate that this wheel is better-suited to handling a wide
variety loads than ﬁxed-radius wheels, and can passively
respond to changes in load to match motor input to vehicle
output. The integration of the transmission and the wheel
makes installation and repair faster and less expensive. The
wheel could be modiﬁed for different ranges of torques by
altering the wheel stiffness. In addition, these wheels are
inexpensive to produce; material costs for the origami wheel
total $1.50, compared to $2.10 for the larger ﬁxed-radius
wheel.
This design can be used to improve wheeled robots in a
variety of applications. It’s simplicity eliminates the multiple
components found in other transmissions while its ease of
installation enables replacement at the user level . These
features are ideal for unmanned ground vehicles that are used
for reconnaissance and ordinance disposal in environments
where logistic support is limited and performance is critical
[19]. It can also be used with planetary exploration rovers
when transportation volume is limited [20], [21]. The wheel
can be compressed into its smallest conﬁguration during
interstellar ﬂight, and the purely mechanical transmission
would reduce the weight and volume of the robot.
In addition to wheeled vehicles, this design has the poten-
tial for placement in other devices. By applying appropriate
constraints, such as bracketing the wheel with plates on both
sides, this design could be used with pulleys or belts to create
a variable transmission in other underactuated devices [22].
A tire that could adjust size with the wheel would improve
road friction and allow for further customization to speciﬁc
needs. A bistable component may also allow this wheel to
be used as a discretely variable transmission as well.
Improvements could be made to performance by altering
the force-displacement curve of the spring. If the wheel were
stiffer at moderate loads, the origami wheel might perform as
well as the large ﬁxed-radius wheel up to the inﬂection point
when the smaller wheel performs better. This would have
the added beneﬁt of widening the power proﬁle, allowing
the motor to operate at peak efﬁciency over a larger range
of loads. Changes in materials and folding techniques may
also reduce slippage and maintain a more even deformation
across the circumference; The uneven displacement of the
faces means that each spring is absorbing and then releasing
energy, resulting in an overall loss. Finally, it is theoretically
possible to improve the range of transmission ratios, but this
involves increasing the ratio of the maximum radius to the
core radius, which is limited by the folding mechanics of the
substrate and the folding technique. Improvements to either
of these would expand the operational loading range of the
wheel.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the
National Science Foundation (award number CCF-1138967)
and the National Defense Science and Engineering Graduate
Fellowship program. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect those of the
National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] P. G. Gott, Changing Gears: The Development of the Automotive
Transmission. Warrendale, PA: Society of Automotive Engineers,
Inc., 1991.
[2] N. Srivastava and I. Haque, “A review on belt and chain continuously
variable transmissions (CVT): Dynamics and control,” Mechanism and
machine theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 19–41, 2009.
[3] J. M. Miller, “Hybrid electric vehicle propulsion system architectures
of the e-CVT type,” Power Electronics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21,
no. 3, pp. 756–767, 2006.
2917
[4] J. M. Miller and M. Everett, “An assessment of ultra-capacitors as the
power cache in Toyota THS-II, GM-Allision AHS-2 and Ford FHS
hybrid propulsion systems,” in Applied Power Electronics Conference
and Exposition, 2005. APEC 2005. Twentieth Annual IEEE, vol. 1,
pp. 481–490.
[5] P. Kanphet, P. Jirawattana, and B. Direcksataporn, “Optimal operation
and control of a hydrostatic CVT powertrain,” SAE transactions, vol.
114, no. 6, pp. 1838–1845, 2005.
[6] P. S. Sreetharan and R. J. Wood, “Passive aerodynamic drag balancing
in a ﬂapping-wing robotic insect,” Journal of Mechanical Design, vol.
132, p. 051006, 2010.
[7] P. S. Sreetharan and R. J. Wood, “Passive torque regulation in
an underactuated ﬂapping wing robotic insect,” Autonomous robots,
vol. 31, no. 2-3, pp. 225–234, 2011.
[8] Y .-S. Kim, G.-P. Jung, H. Kim, K.-J. Cho, and C.-N. Chu, “Wheel
transformer: A miniaturized terrain adaptive robot with passively
transformed wheels,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 2013, pp. 5605–5610.
[9] H. Okuzaki, T. Saido, H. Suzuki, Y . Hara, and H. Yan, “A biomorphic
origami actuator fabricated by folding a conducting paper,” in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 127. IOP Publishing, 2008, p.
012001.
[10] C. C. Min and H. Suzuki, “Geometrical properties of paper spring,”
Manufacturing Systems and Technologies for the New Frontier, pp.
159–162, 2008.
[11] J. P. Whitney, P. S. Sreetharan, K. Y . Ma, and R. J. Wood, “Pop-
up book MEMS,” Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering,
vol. 21, no. 11, p. 115021, 2011.
[12] P. S. Sreetharan, J. P. Whitney, M. D. Strauss, and R. J. Wood,
“Monolithic fabrication of millimeter-scale machines,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 22, no. 5, p. 055027,
2012.
[13] C. D. Onal, R. J. Wood, and D. Rus, “Towards printable robotics:
Origami-inspired planar fabrication of three-dimensional mecha-
nisms,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE,
2011, pp. 4608–4613.
[14] C. D. Onal, R. J. Wood, and D. Rus, “An origami-inspired approach
to worm robots,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 430–438, 2012.
[15] S. M. Felton, M. T. Tolley, C. D. Onal, D. Rus, and R. J. Wood,
“Robot self-assembly by folding: A printed inchworm robot,” in IEEE
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2013, pp. 277–
282.
[16] D.-Y . Lee, G.-P. Jung, M.-K. Sin, S.-H. Ahn, and K.-J. Cho, “De-
formable wheel robot based on origami structure,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2013, pp. 5592–5597.
[17] D.-Y . Lee, J.-S. Kim, S.-R. Kim, J.-S. Koh, and K.-J. Cho, “The de-
formable wheel robot using magic-ball origami structure,” in Proc. of
the ASME 2013 Int. Design Engineering Technical Conf. & Computers
and Information in Engineering Conf. (IDETC/CIE). ASME, 2013.
[18] E. W. Weisstein. Logarithmic spiral. From MathWorld–A
Wolfram Web Resource. Visited 11August2013. [Online]. Available:
http://mathworld.wolfram.com/LogarithmicSpiral.html
[19] M. R. Blackburn, R. T. Laird, and H. R. Everett, “Unmanned ground
vehicle (UGV) lessons learned,” DTIC Document, Tech. Rep., 2001.
[20] S. Hirose, “Variable constraint mechanism and its application for
design of mobile robots,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 19, no. 11, pp. 1126–1138, 2000.
[21] T. Aoki, Y . Murayama, and S. Hirose, “Mechanical design of three-
wheeled lunar rover; ‘Tri-Star IV’,” in Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp.
2198–2203.
[22] S. A. Spanjer, R. Balasubramanian, A. M. Dollar, and J. L. Herder,
“Underactuated gripper that is able to convert from precision to power
grasp by a variable transmission ratio,” in Advances in Reconﬁgurable
Mechanisms and Robots I. Springer, 2012, pp. 669–679.
2918
