A Three-Fingered Cable-Driven Gripper for Underwater Applications
J.R. Bemﬁca, C. Melchiorri, L. Moriello, G. Palli and U. Scarcia
Abstract—In this paper, the design and experimental eval-
uation of a cable driven robotic gripper for underwater ap-
plications is presented. The gripper has three ﬁngers and is
characterised by a large workspace if compared with other
similar devices reported in literature. Its kinematic conﬁgu-
ration allows to execute both parallel and precision grasps
on objects with very different dimensions. The gripper has 8
degrees of freedom actuated by only three motors by means
of a suitable coupling of the joints obtained through the cable
transmission. Moreover, in order to facilitate the execution of
complex tasks, special force/torque sensors are mounted on the
ﬁngertips. The paper reports the main speciﬁcations deriving
from the particular tasks in which the gripper is involved, and
illustrates the proposed design solutions. Results obtained from
real underwater experiments are provided as well, in order to
demonstrate the capabilities of the gripper.
Index Terms—Robotic Gripper, Underwater Applications,
Robust Grasp, Robotic Manipulation, AUV.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the next future, a rapid increase in underwater appli-
cations is expected for exploration, industrial activities and
scientiﬁc purposes. Even if robots are already intensively
used for undersea operations, actually they are remotely
controlled by a human operator and they require a (usually
big) surface vessel, making their usage very expensive. In
this context, the availability of autonomousrobotic platforms
equipped with manipulation devices for the execution of
grasping and manipulation activities will improve signiﬁ-
cantlytheaffordabilityofunderwaterroboticmissions.Inany
case, for underwater robots intended to manipulate objects,
the end-effectors are going to play an important role, as
it is already the case in other contexts like industrial or
space applications. The devices currently available on the
market usually present a quite simple kinematics, a reduced
dexterity, often limited to only one degree of freedom, and
very limited or even absent sensorial equipment [1], [2].
Indeed, the limited variety of tasks to be executed so far in
submarine activities did not really require a very “dexterous”
device. On the other hand, the expected developments in the
ﬁeld,e.g.the introductionof automaticsystems forassembly,
inspection and intervention, will need more versatile end-
effectors able to grasp and manipulate different objects in a
very diversiﬁed way. In literature, few robotic end-effectors
J.R. Bemﬁca, C. Melchiorri, L. Moriello, G. Palli and U. Scarcia are
with the DEI - Universit` a di Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy (email: gian-
luca.palli@unibo.it).
This work has been supported by the FP7 European Project TRIDENT
“Marine Robots and Dexterous Manipulation for Enabling Autonomous
Underwater Multipurpose Intervention Missions”, FP7-ICT-248497, and by
the Italian National Project MARIS “Marine Autonomous Robotics for
InterventionS”.
Fig. 1. The Girona 500 AUV platform with the redundant arm and the
gripper operating in the CIRS (Centre d’Investigaci´ o en Rob` otica Submarina
of the University of Girona) pool: a dummy black box is recovered from
the pool ﬂoor.
forunderwaterapplicationshave beenpresented.Thedevices
described in [3], [4], [5], [6] are among the few examples of
systems for undersea grasping and manipulation purposes.
Remarkableexamplesofgrippersforunderwaterapplications
equipped with tactile sensors can be found in [7], [8]
In this paper, a three-ﬁngered robotic gripper for under-
water applications is presented. The main characteristics of
this device are: 1) the transmission system based on cables
routed through sheaths, allowing the arrangement of the
actuators around the wrist both for reducing the distance
between the palm and the wrist itself and for a better
weight distribution; 2) the ability of grasping objects with
very different shapes and dimensions with both parallel and
precision grasp (ﬁngers opposition); 3) the availability of
force/torque sensors on the ﬁngertip. This work has been
developed as a part of the TRIDENT project, a research
program supportedby the EuropeanCommission and aiming
at developing an autonomous system for submarine inter-
vention activities, [9], [10]. The paper brieﬂy reports also
the results of the experimental evaluation of the autonomous
underwater vehicle (AUV), developedwithin this project and
equippedwith a redundantarm and the gripper,see Fig. 1, as
a demonstration of the effectiveness of the proposed device.
II. GENERAL DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS
During typical missions foreseenin the TRIDENT project,
the AUV will autonomously explore wide underwater areas
searchingfor a speciﬁed object to be recovered.Then,the in-
terventionactions will be plannedforretrievingthe object(s),
and non trivial manipulationactivities will be performed.For
these purposes, the currently available grippers have some
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2469
limitations, deriving from the limited workspace, the limited
typeof achievablegrasps (usuallyonlyparallelor enveloping
grasps) and limited (or absent) sensory equipment, making
it very difﬁcult to achieve real autonomy in task execution.
Therefore, a more versatile gripper has been designed within
the TRIDENT project in order to provide the AUV with
a more “dexterous” device, in such a way to ease the
autonomousexecutionof (possibly)complextasks. The main
functional speciﬁcation for the gripper are the following:
• the hand must be able to grasp objects with dimensions
(diameter) in the range 5 ÷ 200 mm;
• the foreseen operating depth of the ﬁnal project demon-
stration is about 25m;
• the hand must be able to apply both force- and form-
closure grasps with irreversible constraints;
• two- or three-ﬁnger precision, parallel and power grasps
are desirable;
• local compliance on ﬁnger surfaces and/or actuation
complianceis desirable in order to adapt to object shape
irregularities, dimension uncertainties and stabilize the
grasp;
• the sensory equipment of the hand should consider
tactile sensors;
• the dimension should be kept as limited as possible, in
ordertohavealowencumbranceofthearm/handsystem
during navigation.
Inorderto increasethemanipulationcapabilitiesofthe AUV,
the hand is installed on a 7 DoF, redundant arm. The arm
has been designed with a modular approach, and is actuated
by electric motors. For this reason, electric actuation is used
also for the gripper. The communication between the control
system, the motors and the sensors of both the arm and the
gripper is implemented through a 2-wire CAN bus.
III. DESIGN OF THE GRIPPER
Accordingto thegeneralspeciﬁcationsbrieﬂysummarized
in Sec. II, the typology,in terms of size and shape, of objects
to be grasped by the gripper may be quite large. On the
otherhand,itisnotstrictlyrequiredanyinternalmanipulation
capability, but rather the capability to ﬁrmly grasp an object.
For these reasons, a solution composedby a mechanismwith
three ﬁngers capable of a large workspace has been adopted.
Moreover, almost all the mechanical parts are manufactured
in ABS plastic for reducing the weight and increase the
buoyancy, whereas anodized aluminum has been adopted for
the metallic parts to prevent corrosion. The overall weight of
thegripperis about4.5daNinair,whileinwaterit is about1
daN, that can be easily compensated by adding proper ﬂoats.
A. Kinematics
In Fig. 2 a schematic view of the gripper kinematics
is reported. All the joints are of revolute type with PTFE
bushings to reduce friction and prevent corrosion in marine
environment. The gripper has three ﬁngers: one named T
(which can be intended as an opposable thumb), and two
T
FR
FL
Palm
?
?
?
Fig. 2. Kinematic structure of the gripper.
identical ﬁngers named FR and FL (right and left ﬁnger
respectively).This kinematic conﬁgurationis clearly inspired
bythewellknownBarretHand[11],thatrepresentsasuitable
trade-off between hand functionality and design simplicity.
Thethumbhastwolinksonly:theproximallink,connectedto
the palm by a revolute joint (proximaljoint) with a rotational
axes parallel to the palm plane, and a distal link connected
to the proximal link by a revolute joint (distal joint) whose
rotational axes is also parallel to the palm plane. The FR
and FL ﬁngers differ from the thumb by the connection of
the ﬁnger to the palm: in this case, an additional joint (palm
joint) with rotational axis perpendicular to the palm plane is
introducedbetween the palm and the proximal link, allowing
the rotation of the whole ﬁnger with respect to the palm
axis.Thisarrangementallowsperformingbothparallelgrasps
as well as precision grasps, by means of opposition of the
ﬁngertips.
In total, the gripper has 8 joints, each one driven by
an independent closed-loop cable actuation. On the basis
of an analysis of the required gripper capabilities, and in
order to reduce the overall weight, only 3 (identical) motors
are used for the actuation. Obviously, couplings among the
joints is present: these couplings are implemented in a very
simplewaybyconnectinginparallelthecabledrivingsystem
of the three joint groups (i.e. distal, proximal and palm
joints) to the same motor. With reference to Fig. 2, the
angle ?? [90, 240] deg (distal joint angle) is actuated by
a single motor for the three ﬁngers at once, and the same
applies to the angle ?? [30, 180] deg (proximal joint angle)
and the angle ? ? [90, 150] deg (palm joint angle). The
consequence is that, although only three motors are used,
different conﬁgurations can be achieved, allowing a potential
of many types of grasps on a great variety of objects, both in
force and in form closure. Some signiﬁcant ﬁnger postures
and grasp conﬁgurations are reported in Fig. 3.
B. Actuation
The actuation system of the gripper is based on the
Faulhaber12WbrushlessDCmotorEN2250BX4CCDwith
integrated motion controller and CAN interface, provided
with a 14:1 gearbox, guaranteeing a maximum torque of 1
Nm in continuous operation and of 1.54 Nm in intermittent
operation. An additional worm gear 20:1 speed reducer is
2470
(a) Fully closed conﬁguration. (b) Tripod precision grasp.
(c) Parallel grasp. (d) Spherical grasp.
(e) Parallel opened conﬁguration. (f) Fully opened conﬁguration.
Fig. 3. CAD view of the gripper design and kinematic conﬁgurations.
connected to the motor output shaft in order to obtain a
propertorque/speedratiobetweenthemotorandtheloadaxis
together with a more suitable arrangement of the motor for
reducing the actuation encumbrance. Moreover, a reduction
ratio of 4.6:1 is achieved by means of the different radii
of the driving and the joint pulleys adopted in the cable
transmission.Duetothegripperdesign,themaincontribution
to the normal ﬁngertip force is given by the base joint. To
computethe maximumﬁngertip normalforce, we assume: 1)
an equal distribution of the actuator torque between the base
joints of the three ﬁngers; 2) a distance between the ﬁnger
base joint and the center of the ﬁngertip of 170mm; 3) a
20% torque loss due to friction along the cable transmission.
It results that the maximum normal force applicable by each
ﬁnger in continuous operation is about 150 N, which can
be considered satisfactory for the typical operations of the
TRIDENT project. Moreover, thanks to the introduction of
the worm gear reducer, the actuators are non-backdrivable,
a fact that allows holding the desired gripper conﬁguration
without further supplying power to the motors also during
a grasp. The closed-loop cable transmission of the gripper,
whose details are visible in Fig. 4, implements a double-
acting actuator [12]. This transmission system has been
adopted for several reasons:
• itallowstooptimizetheallocationofthemotorsinterms
Sensor
Power Supply
and CAN Bus
Distal Joint
Transmission
Proximal Joint
Transmission
Force/Torque
Sensor
Palm Joint
Transmission
Actuator
Shaft
Connection
Fig. 4. Detailed view of the cable transmission system.
Embedded
Motor
Controller
Motor Speed
Reducer (14:1)
Output Shaft
Worm Gear
Reducer (20:1)
Brushless
Motor
O-ring
Sealing
PTFE-ring
Sealing
Fig. 5. Detail of the actuator and sealing parts.
of required space and weight distribution;
• it represents a simple and convenient way to couple
several joints to a single motor in a ﬁxed way, so that
the effective number of degrees of freedom is equal to
the number of motors;
• it simpliﬁes the transmission chain;
• the sheath-based routing introduces a small compliance
in the transmission, allowing to prevent damages to ac-
tuators and speed reducers due to unexpectedoverloads.
The cable loop can be adjusted and preloaded by means of
a suitable pretension mechanism (similar to the mechanism
usedinthebicyclebrakes).Themotoroutputshaftis connect
to the cable driving pulley by means of a prismatic coupling,
is such a way that the motor box can be detached from
the cable transmission system (and the gripper structure) for
repairing or maintenance without disassembling the cable
transmission itself. The sealing system adopted for the actu-
ators is very simple: each actuator, including the gear worm
reducer, is enclosed in an aluminum box composed by two
shellssealedbyano-ring,seeFig.5,whereastheoutputshaft
ofthegearwormreducerissealedbyacoupleofPTFE-rings
2471
Fixing
Rings
Electronics
Power Supply
Suspension
Ring
Mirror
Phalanx
O-Ring Housing
Electronics
Housing
Cable
Hole
Bottom
Enclosure
LED-PD
Board
Fingertip
Pulp
Upper
Enclosure
Tendon Pulley
Joint Shaft
(a) Internal view of the ﬁngertip force/torque sensor.
Mirror Phalanx
Electronics
Housing
LED-PD
Board
Fingertip
Pulp
Upper
Enclosure
Cable
Bottom
Enclosure
Suspension
Ring
Fixing
Rings
Electronics
Power Supply
(b) The components of the ﬁngertip force/torque sensor.
Fig. 6. Detailed view of the ﬁngertip force/torque sensor.
for reducing the friction loss. Finally, a 4-wire cable carrying
the 24 V power supply and the CAN bus is sealed by means
of an epoxy resin for marine applications.
C. Fingertip Force/Torque Sensor
Speciﬁc force/torque sensors have been designed and
implemented on each ﬁnger, see Fig. 6. In particular, the
ﬁngertip structure includes the sensitive parts of the sensor
and its conditioning electronics, the data acquisition system
and the CAN communication interface. The data acquisition
and communication system has been implemented by means
of a microcontroller that provides also ﬁltering, scaling and
conversion of the acquired data. Moreover, a rubber mold
acts as a soft skin for the ﬁngertip, increasing also the
contact friction and the stability of the grasp [13]. The
sensor is entirely enclosed in a plastic housing ensuring the
sealingoftheelectronics.Theworkingprincipleofthesensor
adopted in the gripper is quite simple and has been already
successfully adopted for other robotic applications, such as
for the force and tactile sensors of the UB Hand IV anthro-
pomorphicrobot hand [14], [15]. The sensor is composed by
8 PhotoDetectors (PDs) mounted on a printed circuit board
(PCB) andcircularlyarrangedaroundaninfraredlightsource
(LED), and by a rectangular mirror facing the PCB and the
optoelectronic components. The PCB is rigidly connected to
the distal phalanx structure, whereas the mirror is connected
to the ﬁngertip contact surface. A deformable sealing ring,
see Fig. 6(a), connects these two parts, allowing the relative
motion of the ﬁngertip contact surface with respect to the
distal phalanx structure. The measurement principle of the
sensor is based on the modulation of the current ﬂowing
through a PD generated by the variation of the relative
position of the LED, and in particular of the angle of view
between the optoelectroniccomponents and the length of the
optical path [16]. By means of this simple principle it is
possible to detect the small changes of position/orientation
of the rectangular mirror in any direction. The pose of the
mirror can be then associated to the contact force/torque
components applied to the ﬁngertip surface by means of
a suitable calibration procedure. In Fig. 7(a) and 7(b) a
comparison of the forces/torques measured by the sensor
and by a reference sensor (ATI Gamma SI-130-10) are
respectively reported. The details about the model and the
working principle of this sensor are not reported here for
brevity, the interested reader can refer to [17], [18], [19] for
a more detailed description of the sensing principle. It is
important to note that the water pressure causes an offset on
the force normal to the ﬁngertip surface: this offset can be
measured when the AUV reaches the desired working depth
(before a contact occurs at the ﬁngertips), registered by the
controlsystem andthen subtractedfromthe measurementfor
a correct force estimation. In Fig. 6(b) the componentsof the
ﬁngertip force/torque sensors are shown in details.
IV. THE ARM-GRIPPER CONTROL SYSTEM
All the motors and the sensors of both the arm and the
gripper share the same power supply and are interconnected
via a standard CAN bus. A hierarchical structure has been
adopted for the control of the whole system, composed
by the AUV, the arm and the gripper. For both the arm
and the gripper the low-level velocity/position control is
directly implemented in the Faulhaber motor controllers.
The Faulhaber motion controllers are commanded using the
OpenCAN protocol [20] that allows basic functions such
as monitoring of temperature and currents, velocity/position
control, customization of the controller parameters and so
on. The gripper force/torque sensors exploit the same CAN
interface and protocol for data communication.
A middle-level controller is devoted to the coordination of
the arm/gripper system with the AUV and is implemented,
under the RTAI-Linux realtime operating system running on
a PC-104 hosted on the vehicle, by means of a realtime task
running at 100 hz. This controller communicates with the
arm/gripper motors and sensors through the CAN interface
(at1Mb/s)andcalculatestheset-pointvelocitiesofeachjoint
in order to stabilize and hold the grasp at the desired shape
on the basis of the kinematic model of the gripper and the
force/torque ﬁngertip sensors information. The middle-level
2472
?100
?50
0
50
Reference  Force [N]
 
 
Fx
Fy
Fz
?100
?50
0
50
Estimated Force [N]
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
?2
?1
0
1
2
Force Error [N]
Time [s]
(a) Comparison of the estimated force with the reference
sensor.
?2
?1
0
1
2
Reference  Torque [Nm]
 
 
Tx
Ty
Tz
?2
?1
0
1
2
Estimated Torque [Nm]
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40
?0.2
?0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Torque Error [Nm]
Time [s]
(b) Comparison of the estimated torque with the reference
sensor.
Fig. 7. Forces/torques given by means of the ﬁngertip sensor.
controller receives also the commands from the high-level
mission controller through an Ethernet connection.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Preliminary experiments have been carried out in the
laboratory to test the capabilities of the gripper. In Fig. 8
severalgraspsexecutedbythegripperareshown.Thegripper
is able to perform power grasps, see Fig. 8(a), to grasp
different objects both in tripod conﬁguration, as shown in
Fig. 8(c), and in parallel conﬁguration, see Fig. 8(b) and
Fig. 8(d). In particular, Fig. 8(e) shows the ability of the
gripper of grasping objects up to 340 mm width, whereas
Fig. 8(b) shows the ability of grasping very thin objects.
The whole integrated system composed by the gripper, the
arm and the Girona 500 AUV [21], [22] has been then
tested ﬁrst in a pool available at CIRS (Centre d’Investigaci´ o
en Rob` otica Submarina of the University of Girona) as
shown in Fig. 1. As a demonstration of more complex tasks,
an experimental test in real undersea operations have been
executed, according to the goals of the TRIDENT project.
The AUV integrated with the arm/gripper system has been
tested in the harbor at Port de Soller, Spain, operating at a
working depth of about 25 m. Autonomous operations of the
overall system have been successfully executed, as shown in
Fig. 9 and in the video attached to this paper. The complete
videoshowingthe ﬁnal experimentsofthe TRIDENTproject
(a) Power grasp. (b) Parallel grasp on a thin object.
(c) Pen tripod grasp. (d) Parallel grasp on a plastic bottle.
(e) The gripper grasping a 340mm width box.
Fig. 8. The gripper executing grasps on various objects.
is available at http://www.irs.uji.es/2nd-i-auv/videos/E3-
Autonomous-Intervention/TRIDENT-Final-Exp.mp4. In par-
ticular, after getting the seaﬂoor mosaic (generated on the
survey phase), the AUV performed autonomous detection of
the dummy black box to be recovered, and the grasp was
speciﬁed by the human operator using a purposely designed
user interface. Then, with the aid of the AUV vision system,
the black box recovery stage was autonomously initiated by
the system, as detailed in Fig. 9(d).For that purpose,a robust
vision system has been implemented on the AUV by using
both a 2D camera and a 3D vision system. Once the black
box has been autonomouslygrasped by the gripper,the AUV
brought it to the surface. The success of the experiment
was observed thanks to the images provided by the onboard
camerasoftheAUV,andwiththehelpofdiversthatrecorded
2473
(a) AUV deployment.
Black
Box
Gripper
(b) AUV approaching the black box.
(c) The black box is approached. (d) Grasp execution seen from the
AUV camera.
Fig. 9. The AUV with integrated arm and gripper during the experimental
tests at Port de Soller, Spain.
the experiment from outside, as shown in Fig. 9(b) and 9(c).
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, the design of a three-ﬁngered cable driven
robotic gripper for undersea activities has been presented.
This gripper is characterized by a large workspace, and very
different grasp conﬁgurations can be achieved thanks to its
kinematics. Experimental data obtained in both laboratory
andrealtests havebeenbrieﬂyillustratedandcommentedon.
The results show the positive aspects of the design choices,
and, in particular, that the choice of the cable transmission
system does not represent a limitation, but an advantage,
even in the underwater environment. Particular attention has
been devoted to the sealing system, focusing on the use of
commercial components and on the reduction of the parts
to be sealed for increasing the overall system reliability.
The experiments carried out in the marine environment
demonstrates the effectiveness of the mechanical design of
the gripper, of its actuation systems and of the force/torque
sensors purposely developed for underwater activities.
REFERENCES
[1] Sarobotics, UK. (2012, June). [Online]. Available:
http://www.sarobotics.co.uk/
[2] Schilling Robotics, USA. (2012). [Online]. Available:
http://www.schilling.com/
[3] D. Lane, G.Bartolini, G. Cannata, G.Casalino, J.Davies, G. Veruggio,
M. Canals, and C.Smith, “Advanced manipulation for deep underwater
sampling: the amadeus research project,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on
Control Applications, vol. 2, 1998, pp. 1068–1073.
[4] R. Gad, G. Naik, and N. Aralgedad, “A design of 2-dof gripper circuit
for deep-sea objects,” in MTTS/IEEE TECHNO-OCEAN, vol. 3, 2004,
pp. 1402–1409.
[5] Q. Meng, H. Wang, P. Li, L. Wang, and Z. He, “Dexterous underwater
robot hand: HEU Hand II,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Mechatronics
and Automation, 2006, pp. 1477–1482.
[6] P. Jia, Q. Meng, and L. Wang, “Dynamic analysis on ﬁngers of the
underwater multi-ﬁngered robot hand,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on
Mechatronics and Automation, 2007, pp. 757 –762.
[7] D. Lane, J.Davies, G. Casalino, G. Bartolini, G. Cannata, G. Veruggio,
M. Canals, C. Smith, D. O’Brien, M. Pickett, G. Robinson, D. Jones,
E. Scott, A. Ferrara, D. Angelleti, M. Coccoli, R. Bono, P. Virgili,
R.Pallas,andE.Gracia, “AMADEUS:advanced manipulation fordeep
underwater sampling,” IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine, vol. 4,
no. 4, pp. 34–45, 1997.
[8] D. O’Brien and D. Lane, “Force and slip sensing for a dextrous under-
water gripper,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation,
vol. 2, 1998, pp. 1057–1062.
[9] M. Prats, J. Garcia, S. Wirth, D. Ribas, P. Sanz, P. Ridao, N. Gracias,
and G. Oliver, “Multipurpose autonomous underwater intervention: A
systems integration perspective,” in Mediterranean Conf. on Control
Automation,, 2012, pp. 1379–1384.
[10] G. De Novi, C. Melchiorri, J. Garc` ıa, P. Sanz, P. Ridao, and G. Oliver,
“New approach for a reconﬁgurable autonomous underwater vehicle
for intervention,” IEEE Aerospace and Electronic Systems Magazine,
vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 32–36, 2010.
[11] W. T. Townsend, “The BarrettHand Grasper Programmably Flexible
Part Handling and Assembly,” Industrial Robot, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.
181–188, 2000.
[12] C. Melchiorri and M. Kaneko, “Robot hands,” in Springer Handbook
of Robotics, B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, Eds. Springer, 2008, pp.
345–360.
[13] G.Berselli, M.Piccinini, G.Palli, andG.Vassura,“Engineering Design
of Fluid-Filled Soft Covers for Robotic Contact Interfaces: Guidelines,
Nonlinear Modeling, and Experimental Validation,” IEEE Trans. on
Robotics, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 436–449, 2011.
[14] G.DeMaria, C.Natale, andS.Pirozzi, “Force/tactile sensorforrobotic
applications,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 175, pp. 60–72,
2012.
[15] G. Palli, C. Melchiorri, G. Vassura, G. Berselli, S. Pirozzi, C. Natale,
G. De Maria, and C. May, “Innovative technologies for the next
generation of robotic hands,” in Advanced Bimanual Manipulation,
B. Siciliano (Ed.), Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, vol. 80,
Springer, 2012, pp. 173–218.
[16] S. Kasap, Optoelectronics and Photonics: Principles and Practices.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
[17] G. Palli and S. Pirozzi, “Force sensor based on discrete optoelectronic
components andcompliant frames,” SensorsandActuators A:Physical,
vol. 165, pp. 239–249, 2011.
[18] ——, “A miniaturized optical force sensor for tendon-driven mecha-
tronic systems: Design and experimental evaluation,” Mechatronics,
vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 1097–1111, 2012.
[19] ——, “Optical force sensor for the DEXMART Hand twisted string
actuation system,” Sensors & Transducers, vol. 148, no. 1, pp. 28–32,
2013.
[20] CIA. (2012) CAN in Automation. [Online]. Available: http://www.can-
cia.org/
[21] D. Ribas, N. Palomeras, P. Ridao, M. Carreras, and A. Mallios,
“Girona 500 auv: From survey to intervention,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
on Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 46–53, 2012.
[22] M. Prats, D. Ribas, N. Palomeras, J. C. Garc´ ıa, V. Nannen, S. Wirth,
J.J.Fern´ andez, J.P.Beltr´ an, R.Campos,P.Ridao, P.J.Sanz,G.Oliver,
M. Carreras, N. Gracias, R. Mar´ ın, and A.Ortiz, “Reconﬁgurable AUV
forintervention missions: Acase studyon underwater object recovery,”
Journal ofIntelligent Service Robotics, vol.5,no.1,pp.19–31,January
2012.
2474
