  
? 
Abstract— Recent work on probe-based confocal 
endomicroscopy has demonstrated its potential role for 
real-time assessment of tumour margins during breast 
conserving surgery.  However, endomicroscope probes tend to 
have a very small field-of-view, making surveillance of large 
areas of tissue difficult, and limiting practical clinical 
deployment. In this paper, a new robotic device for controlled, 
large area scanning based on a fibre bundle endomicroscope 
probe is proposed. The prototype uses a 2-DOF mechanism (-90 
to +90 degrees bending on one axis, 360 degrees of rotation on a 
second axis) as well as a passive linear structure to conform to 
undulating surfaces. Both axes are driven by brushless DC servo 
motors with computer control, thus facilitating large 
field-of-view mosaicing. Experimental results have shown good 
repeatability and low hysteresis of the device, which is able to 
scan different surface trajectories (e.g. a spiral pattern over a 
hemi-spherical surface) with consistent tissue contact. Ex vivo 
human breast tissue results are demonstrated, illustrating a 
viable scanning approach for breast endomicroscopy. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Breast cancer is currently the second leading cause of 
death of women in Europe [1]. Smaller cancers are often 
treated by breast conserving surgery (wide local excision), a 
procedure to remove the tumour and a surrounding cuff of 
normal tissue while leaving the remainder of the breast intact 
[2].  Currently, definitive assessment of whether the tumour 
has been completely excised can only be made 
post-operatively through histology. If the margins of the 
excised tissue are found to contain cancer cells (known as 
‘positive’ margins), then this implies that the tumour has not 
been entirely removed, and that there is a high risk of cancer 
recurrence [3]. The patient will often be required to return to 
theatre for a second operation. This carries a further risk of 
postoperative infections, has a negative impact on cosmesis, 
and increases costs due to longer stays in hospital [4].  
In the UK, the proportion of patients with positive surgical 
margins ranges from 20% to 40% [3, 5] and the national 
reoperation rates are 30% for non-invasive and 18% for 
invasive breast cancer [6]. These high reoperation rates 
suggest that a real-time, intraoperative technique for 
confirming complete removal of the cancer during surgery 
itself could have a significant impact on patient outcomes. 
Unfortunately, existing techniques such as gross examination 
by palpation [7] and intraoperative radiography on specimens 
[8] are not reliable. Frozen sections (a faster alternative to 
histology) can be used for intraoperative evaluation while the 
 
Siyang Zuo, Michael Hughes, Petros Giataganas, Carlo Seneci, Tou Pin 
Chang, and Guang-Zhong Yang are with the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic 
Surgery, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ, London, UK (email: 
s.zuo@imperial.ac.uk). 
patient remains anaesthetized, but are rarely performed as they 
are costly, prolong the surgery [9], and are less reliable for the 
evaluation of non-invasive or small cancers [10].  
Fluorescence confocal endomicroscopy [11], a cellular 
scale endoscopic imaging technique, is a candidate technology 
for real-time assessment of breast tumour margins. Confocal 
microscopy is distinguished from conventional microscopy by 
its ability to reject out-of-focus background light. This makes 
it suitable for use in vivo, where thick tissue must necessarily 
be imaged. Several groups have already considered bench-top 
confocal microscopy for analysis of breast tissues (for 
example [12]), and confocal endomicroscopy has also recently 
been suggested [13]. These results have indicated that it is 
possible to visualize key morphological structures of normal 
and cancerous breast tissue. Unlike bench-top microscopy, 
endomicroscopy could potentially be used directly on the 
internal surface of the breast cavity created during surgery 
rather than on ex vivo tissue samples.  
In fluorescence confocal endomicroscopy, tissue is first 
stained using either topical or intravenous fluorescent contrast 
agents such as acriflavine hydrochloride and sodium 
fluorescein respectively. An image is then assembled in a 
point-by-point fashion by scanning a laser beam over the 
tissue surface. This scanning, which is a necessary feature of 
confocal microscopy, must be performed at high speed in 
order to achieve useful frame rates. The difficulties associated 
with miniaturizing high-speed scanners [11] have led to the 
development of fibre-bundle based endomicroscopes. 
Cellvizio by Mauna Kea Technologies, for example, can be 
used to identify characteristic morphological features of 
neoplastic and non-neoplastic changes of the gastrointestinal 
tract [14], biliary strictures [14] and lung [15]. A range of 
other applications have also been considered, and recently the 
potential for confocal endomicroscopy to image benign and 
malignant morphological features of breast tissues, and so to 
be used as a form of intraoperative surgical guidance, has been 
suggested [13]. 
One limitation arising from the use of fibre bundles is a 
trade-off between lateral resolution and field-of-view. Fibre 
bundles contain a finite number of cores (typically 30,000), 
which essentially act as pixels in the image. Whilst 
high-resolution endomicroscopy is possible through the use of 
non-unity magnification optics at the distal tip of the fibre 
bundle, the result is always a proportional reduction in the 
field-of-view. High-resolution fibre bundle endomicroscopes 
(e.g. Cellvizio UHD probes) are limited in field-of-view to the 
order of 240 µm, making surveillance of large areas of tissue 
difficult. 
Development of a Large Area Scanner for Intraoperative Breast 
Endomicroscopy 
Siyang Zuo, Michael Hughes, Petros Giataganas, Carlo Seneci, Tou Pin Chang, and 
Guang-Zhong Yang, Fellow, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3524
  
The effective field-of-view can be increased by mosaicing:  
stitching together of adjacent image frames as the probe is 
moved across the tissue [16-19]. This tends to be rather 
difficult to perform, requiring careful control of the probe over 
small scales. In practice, manual handling of large area 
coverage can be difficult and time consuming, thus motivating 
the development of mechanical scanning devices which could 
translate the endomicroscope probe smoothly over a 2D area.  
Our early work was focused on the development of an 
articulated robot for the general manipulation of biophotonics 
probes for minimally invasive surgery [20]. Recent 
developments in this research area include a scanning device 
by Rosa et al., which employs hydraulic micro-balloons [21], 
and one by Erden et al., using a conic structure [22]. A 
force-adaptive motion control approach has been proposed by 
Newton et al., which uses an articulated robotic endoscope 
[23], a handheld device by Latt et al. [24], or a cooperative 
robotic arm [25] to generate a 3D map of the tissue. Attention 
has also been paid to solving the difficulties associated with 
scanning over large areas of deformable tissue and reliably 
assembling mosaics [26-28]. 
The solutions described in [21] and [22] were targeted at 
applications for which the scanning device must firstly remain 
very compact, and secondly must be flexible. As a result, only 
relatively small areas of tissue could be mosaiced. The 
requirements for a scanner for imaging the breast cavity are 
somewhat different, with ergonomic constraints relaxed, but 
with a need to scan over a large, 3D curved surface [25]. 
Studies so far which have shown large area mosaics using 
mechanized scanning of endomicroscope probes [25, 28] 
involved complex robotic systems that could not easily be 
adapted to in vivo clinical use. This application therefore 
requires a new device which is capable of scanning over a 
much larger area of tissue, in a more reliable and repeatable 
manner, but with simpler mechatronics. 
To this end, we have developed a prototype device which 
would allow scanning over the internal surface of the breast 
cavity. The scanner is designed to be inserted through the 
incision created during breast conserving surgery. When the 
scanner approaches the target imaging area, the tissue surface 
is shaped to a smooth surface by a thin transparent plastic 
membrane attached to the scanner. The device then smoothly 
scans the endomicroscope probe over a large, 2D area of 
tissue, allowing a mosaic to be assembled. 
In this paper, a prototype of the scanner with 2 degrees of 
freedom (DOF) scanning mechanism and a 1-DOF passive 
linear structure is described. In the following sections, we 
include: 1) a description of the novel mechanical design, 2) 
integration with the endomicroscope and mosaicing software, 
3) mechanical performance analysis, 4) mosaicing 
experiments and 5) results of ex vivo human breast tissue 
experiments to evaluate the potential of this device for breast 
endomicroscopy. 
II. DESIGN CONCEPT 
A. 2-DOF scanning mechanism 
The device is able to scan over a 2D curved surface by 
bending and rotation of the distal tip. The distal structure 
consists of two cylindrical tube frames (tip and base), one pin 
joint, one spur gear link, and one rotation gear shaft (Fig. 1). 
The base and tip frames are linked via the pin joint, while the 
spur gear is fixed to the tip frame. The bending motion is 
driven by the rotation gear shaft which sits inside the base 
frame and engages with the spur gear. When the rotation gear 
shaft rotates by angle ?, it provides the tip frame with a 
moment around the pin joint, thus achieving a bending angle 
of angle ?. The relation between ? and ? is: 
  
 
 
  
The rotational motion is achieved by rotating the base 
frame and the rotation gear tube at the same speed and in the 
same direction. Together with the bending motion, this 
provides the hemi-spherical workspace shown in Fig. 2. For 
example, a spiral trajectory can be achieved by rotating the 
base frame and rotation gear tube simultaneously at varying 
rotational speeds. The radial position h is related to the angles 
of rotation by: 
       
 
 
    )) 
The angular position around the spiral is given by the 
rotational angle of the base frame (?).  
B. Passive linear structure 
The passive linear structure is shown in Fig. 3. It consists 
of the contact head, two freely rotating balls, a spring and the 
tip frame. The balls, which are embedded in the contact head, 
rotate during scanning, acting as wheels, while the spring 
ensures constant contact between the head and the tissue. This 
structure is designed to allow effective scanning over 
undulating surfaces. 
A membrane is fixed to the support attachment. In breast 
endomicroscopy, this can be inserted into the breast cavity to 
reshape the uneven surface of the tissue. By ensuring 
consistent tissue contact, it creates a smooth surface for 
scanning. Provided the membrane is sufficiently thin, the 
finite working distance of endomicroscopy probes (which can 
easily be arranged to be of the order of several tens of 
microns) allows tissue to be imaged. 
 
Figure 1.  Bending mechanism, transforming rotational motion of the gear 
shaft to a rotation of the frame, enablinga ± 90 degrees bending motion. 
 
3525
  
 
(a)                                         (b) 
Figure 2.  Rotating mechanism, (a) Rotating model of bending distal end, 
(b) workspace of bending distal end. 
 
Figure 3.  Passive linear structure. 
III. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed hardware consists of the multi-DOF distal 
end, the driver unit, a computer-based control unit and a fibre 
bundle endomicroscope as shown in Fig. 4. 
A.  Multi-DOF distal end 
The distal end has a 1-DOF bending and a 1-DOF rotating 
mechanism. The prototype has an outer diameter of 6 mm, 
and a length of 83 mm, while the bending tip has a length of 
23 mm (Fig. 5). The prototype is equipped with one 3 mm 
diameter central channel, through which the endomicroscope 
probe can be passed. The distal end (except the contact tip) 
was fabricated from stainless steel, while the contact tip was 
rapid prototyped (VeroBlackPlus, Objet Geometries Ltd., 
Israel). The endomicroscope probe is passed through the 3 
mm working channel of the scanner and fixed in place by a 
screw on the distal tip. 
B. Driver unit 
The rotation gear shaft and base frame, which are placed 
concentrically, bend and rotate the distal end using two 
brushless DC-servomotors (1226 E 012 B K1855, Fauhaber 
SA, Germany) with rotation gears (Fig. 5). A spring structure 
is located posterior to the rotation gear for minimizing the 
backlash between the rotation gear shaft and spur gear link. 
Hall effect sensors are used to detect the rotation angle of the 
shaft for the purposes of feedback control. The motion 
controllers have been integrated into the driver unit. The 
distal end is specifically separated from the driver unit, 
allowing it to be cleaned and sterilized.  
C. User interface 
A custom designed user interface has been developed to 
control the prototype from a standard PC. Once the scan 
parameters are entered, the device can scan the target surface 
automatically. These parameters include the linear velocity of 
the probe, the required number of turns in the spiral and the 
radial spacing between turns. For experimental purposes, the 
actual signal output of the motor, including rotation speed, 
and rotation angle, as well as the effective scan speed and 
scan area, are displayed and recorded. In future we intend to 
use this information to assist with the assembling of mosaics. 
 
Figure 4.  System configuration of scanner. The multi-DOFs distal end is 
sterilizable and separable from the driver unit 
Figure 5.  Prototype of the scanner. (a) The scanner with the 
endomicroscope probe inserted; (b) distal end showing dimensions; (c) 
details of the driver unit with rotation gear, brushless DC-servomotors, gear 
head and Hall sensor. 
D. Fibre bundle confocal endomicroscope 
The fibre-bundle and micro-lens assembly (the ‘probe’) 
used for this study are from a commercial endomicroscopy 
system (Cellvizio Gastroflex UHD, Mauna Kea 
Technologies), and were used with in-house laser scanning 
and image acquisition systems. This custom acquisition 
system allows a combination of imaging, mosaicing and 
scanner control for real-time use. The laser scanning system, 
which is similar to several others systems reported in the 
literature [11, 29, 30], uses a galvanometer mirror, a resonant 
scanning mirror and relay optics to scan a 488 nm laser beam 
over the proximal end of the fibre bundle. This scanning 
pattern is transferred to the tissue by the bundle and the distal 
optics, giving a usable circular field-of-view with a diameter 
of approximately 240 µm. Returning fluorescent emission is 
de-scanned by the same scanning system, diverted by a 
3526
  
dichroic mirror, and focused through a pinhole onto an 
avalanche photodiode (APD). The signal from the APD is 
digitized by a high-speed digitizer (National Instruments), 
and image frames are assembled using software developed in 
Labview (National Instruments). The honeycomb-like image 
structure arising from the fibre bundle is removed using a 
Gaussian spatial filter. Images are displayed live to the user at 
10 frames per second, and also streamed to an uncompressed 
AVI.  
E. Mosaicing software 
For testing purposes, we implemented a simple, offline 
mosaicing algorithm in Matlab. Since the 2D motion of the 
scanner is partly achieved through rotation of the distal tip, 
we expect rotation between successive image frames in 
addition to a lateral translation. This rotation can be corrected 
for prior to mosaicing as follows. For initial experiments, we 
set the software to rotate each image frame by a number of 
trial angles (between 0 and 8 degrees in steps of 0.5
 
degrees) 
and computed the normalized 2D cross-correlation between 
each rotated image and the previous frame. The most likely 
rotation angle and lateral shift could then be calculated by 
searching for the cross correlation peak across the three 
dimensions. If the cross-correlation peak fell below a 
threshold (empirically set at 0.92 in this study), the shift and 
rotation was instead assumed to be the same as for the 
previous pair of frames. We did not use a blending algorithm - 
the new frame is simply copied to the mosaic in the estimated 
position, over-writing any existing pixels. The algorithm is 
therefore a simplified version of those previously reported for 
mosaicking of confocal and widefield endomicroscopy 
videos [16-19, 31]. The algorithm could be improved by 
attempting to correct for the raster scan formation of the 
images, and inevitable tissue deformation [27]. 
F. Trajectory Selection 
The time taken to complete a scan would be an important 
consideration when translating this technology to the clinic. 
Given the fairly low (10 Hz) frame rate of the 
endomicroscopy system, it is important to cover the required 
scanning area as efficiently as possible. This is complicated 
by the need to ensure sufficient overlap between image 
frames for robust mosaicing. We found experimentally that a 
shift of 40 µm between images (i.e. an overlap of 200 µm) 
was necessary to ensure consistent results, implying a 
maximum acceptable linear velocity of 0.4 mm/s.  
 
Figure 6.  The diameter of the circular area that the device can scan over in a 
given time for values of the loop spacing    between 0.2 and 1 mm (in 
0.1 mm steps). Note that a value below 0.24 mm would be required for a 
spiral without gaps.   
While a large number of trajectories are possible, we 
selected a spiral path as an effective way of covering a 
circular scan area. (Selection of the optimum trajectory for 
different scan areas is a topic of further investigation). If the 
spacing between spiral loops is set at 0.24 mm then the loops 
of the spiral will just touch; any larger and there will be areas 
between the loops which are not imaged. We modeled the 
diameter of the scanned area for different loop spacings; the 
results are shown in Fig. 6. The dotted line shows the settings 
chosen for the experimental results in the following section.  
These results were computed by integrating over the 
length of the particular spiral defined by the required loop 
spacing and total time. The diameter was then taken as twice 
the radius of the final point of the spiral. A good 
approximation of these curves can be obtained if we note that 
the length   of a spiral of radius   and loop spacing     can 
be approximated by: 
  
  
 
  
 
If the spiral length is scanned in time  , with a frame rate F of 
10 s
-1
 and a frame overlap of   , is given by         , 
then a first order approximation for the scan diameter   can 
be derived: 
    
√
            
 
 
The longest diameter of the resulting mosaic would be equal 
to       . 
  For the current configuration, the frame rate is 10 s
-1
 and 
we chose an image spacing    of 0.04 mm (as discussed 
above).  If a continuous mosaic (i.e. a spiral without gaps 
between loops) was required, then the loop spacing    would 
need to be on the order of 0.2 mm, giving an approximate 
scan time       
 
 seconds for a circle diameter of   mm. 
However, for the results presented below we set      mm, 
giving a more favourable      
 
, albeit for a spiral that 
now contains gaps. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A. Mechanical performance 
We first tested the mechanical performance of the 2-DOF 
scanning mechanism. The bending and rotation angles were 
evaluated against the target angles using a digital video 
camera. For the bending mechanism, measurements were 
performed in four parts: (a) bending from 0 degrees to +90 
degrees, (b) returning to 0 degrees, (c) bending 0 to -90 
degrees, and (d) returning again to 0 degrees (d). We repeated 
this set of measurements three times. Results are shown in Fig. 
7(a). Similarly, for a test of the rotating mechanism the 
scanner was first rotated from 0 to 360 degrees (e), and then 
returned to 0 degrees (f), as shown in Fig. 7(b). 
These results demonstrate that the prototype can 
successfully achieve ±90 degrees of bending and 360 degrees 
of rotation. Standard deviations of the measured angles were 
±1.07 degrees for the bending motion and ±0.41 degrees for 
the rotational motion on average. The maximum hysteresis for 
bending was 4.54 degrees and for rotation was 1.79 degrees.  
3527
  
We then evaluated the trajectory of the tip using an NDI 
Aurora Electromagnetic Tracking System (NDI Corp, CA). A 
mini electromagnetic sensor with 6 DOFs was attached to the 
tip of the scanner, allowing its position to be measured. The 
trajectory of a full spiral scan is shown in Fig. 8. The trajectory 
shows that the scanner can cover a large area with a radius of 
23 mm. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7.  Results of 2DOF scanning characteristic test, showing 
relationship between target angles and actual bending and rotating angles. (a) 
1-DOF bending mechanism, (b) 1-DOF rotating mechanism.  
 
(a) 
 
(b)                                                            (c) 
Figure 8.  Trajectory of a sample scan measured by the Aurora probe. (a) 
Setup for the experiment. (b) 3D trajectory of spiral scan, (c) 2D trajectory of 
spiral scan. 
 
Figure 9.  Mosaic created from large area spiral scan over lens tissue paper 
stained with acriflavine. Circled insets are shown at approximately 2.5X 
magnifcation. Stitching between individual frames is visible in the insets. 
B. Image mosaicing  
The prototype has the capability to scan over an area using 
various trajectories, such as linear scans, concentric circles 
and spiral scans. This was demonstrated by scanning a 
non-overlapping spiral pattern over a piece of lens tissue paper 
stained with acriflavine. The resulting mosaic is shown in 
Fig. 9. The scanner motors were controlled so as to maintain 
an approximately constant probe tip velocity of 0.4 mm/s, or a 
shift of approximately 40 µm between image frames. The 
spacing between loops of the spiral was set to approximately 
1 mm, corresponding to the settings indicated by the dashed 
line in Fig. 6. This allowed the spiral to be scanned in 
61 seconds, and a mosaic to be created from 610 image frames. 
Note that the diameter of the spiral is approximately 4 mm, 
somewhat smaller than would be predicted from Fig. 6, most 
likely due to a combination of mosaicing errors and 
deformation of the scanned surface. This diameter is also 
considerably smaller than the full scan range of the system for 
reasons we discuss below. 
C. Ex vivo breast tissue experiments 
We confirmed the ability of the system to obtain 
consistent ex vivo images from freshly excised, 
acriflavine-stained human breast cancer tissues. All subjects 
gave prior written informed consent and Human Tissue 
Authority licence and ethics approval were obtained from 
Imperial College Tissue Bank (R12047). 
3528
  
For this test we performed linear scans by driving only the 
bending motor and leaving the rotational position unchanged. 
This allowed us to obtain high quality mosaics using a simple, 
real-time normalized cross-correlation algorithm as we did 
not need to consider rotations. For this test we fixed the 
transparent membrane onto a support ring which was fixed to 
the rotational shaft of the scanner, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Fig. 
10(b) shows mosaics of linear scans (approximately 5 mm in 
length) obtained over ex vivo human breast tissue. 
V. DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we have proposed a large area scanner for 
breast endomicroscopy, and we confirmed that our prototype 
has a large workspace, high repeatability and small hysteresis. 
The distal end of the scanner enables bending between ±90 
degrees, and rotation of 360 degrees, with repeatability of 
±1.07 and ±0.41 degrees respectively. Backlash was reduced 
by a spring structure in the driver unit, which engages the 
rotation gear shaft against the spur gear link. The hysteresis 
between the rotation gear shaft and the spur gear link was 
small at a maximum of 4.54 degrees. This could be 
minimized further by increasing the precision of the gear on 
the rotation gear shaft. 
 
(a) 
 
                           (b)                                                           (c) 
Figure 10.  Mosaic images, (a) Setup. (b) Human breast fat: numerous 
polygonal-shaped, dark-coloured cells with thin hyperfluorescent borders 
depicts the typical appearances of fat cells. (c) Human breast cancer: 
markedly disorganized architecture with hypercellularity and haphazard 
arrangement of cells. Circled insets are shown at approximately 6X 
magnification. 
The trajectory experiment with the NDI Aurora 
Electromagnetic Tracking System showed that the distal end 
achieves a smooth large spiral scanning motion in 3D space 
when unloaded. The scan area was a hemispherical surface 
with a radius of 23 mm, which is considerably larger than for 
previously reported endomicroscopy scanners. However, 
forming a continuous mosaic over such a large area would be 
an interesting image processing problem which is being 
investigated separately. It may be preferable to instead create 
an array of smaller mosaic centered on user-specified points 
of interest. Such an approach can be easily accommodated by 
the proposed hardware design.  
A further impediment to achieving a large area scan is the 
flexibility of the fibre bundle probes. We are not aware of 
minimum bending radius specified for the probe used here, 
but commonly used Fujikura fibre bundles have a minimum 
bending radius of the order of 70 mm (FIGH-30-800G). It is 
therefore unlikely that the full hemispherical scan could be 
achieved in practice. To resolve this issue, more flexible fibre 
bundles such as Schott leached imaging bundles, together 
with customized distal optics, need to be used. 
To demonstrate the potential of the device to image over 
substantial areas of tissue we implemented a cross-correlation 
based mosaicing algorithm. Since the position and angle of 
each frame is determined by comparing it with the previous 
frame, this method accumulates errors during the scan. This 
would prevent a gap-free image from being generated, as it is 
unlikely that the loops of the spiral would correctly align. A 
more complex mosaicing algorithm would therefore be 
required for clinical use, one that uses positional feedback 
from the motor and takes account of tissue deformation. 
Given the likely high computational requirements of such an 
algorithm it may be necessary to implement a simpler, online 
version for provisional, real-time visualization, and a more 
complete, offline version for diagnostic purposes.  
The ex vivo tissue evaluation in this study has shown that 
the scanner has strong potential to enable stable imaging from 
human breast tissue. A support ring with a membrane as an 
attachment was used to facilitate linear scanning. Together 
with the passive linear structure we found this to be a useful 
method for slightly reshaping the tissue surface to allow 
smooth scanning. The membrane could also be inflated by air 
or water and this could potentially conform irregular cavity 
surfaces to the smooth, spherical membrane surface, thereby 
aiding large area scanning of irregular surfaces. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this study, we have developed a scanning device to 
address the problems associated with scanning and mosaicing 
over large tissue areas in confocal endomicroscopy. This 
device was designed specifically for use during breast surgery, 
and so is substantially different from previously reported 
endomicroscopy scanners. By sacrificing the miniaturization 
required for flexible endoscopic use, our rigid device makes it 
possible to scan over a much larger spherical surface. This is 
achieved through use of a novel 2-DOF scanning mechanism, 
together with a passive linear structure for smoothing the 
tissue surface. We have demonstrated the creation of a mosaic 
over a substantial portion of the scanning workspace, 
demonstrating the potential to provide a much larger 
3529
  
field-of-view for ‘optical biopsy’ than has previously been 
possible. This could offer the surgeon much more 
comprehensive information than simple point imaging or 
short manual mosaics, greatly improving the prospects for 
intraoperative in situ cavity margin evaluation.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by EPSRC grant EP/IO27769/1: 
SMART Endomicroscopy. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Ferlay, P. Autier, M. Boniol, M. Heanue, M. Colombet, and P. Boyle, 
“Estimates of the cancer incidence and mortality in Europe in 2006,” 
Annals of oncology : official journal of the European Society for 
Medical Oncology / ESMO 18, pp. 581-592, 2007. 
[2] G. F. Schwartz, U. Veronesi, K. B. Clough, J. M. Dixon, I. S. Fentiman, 
S. H. Heywang-Kobrunner, R. Holland, K. S. Hughes, R. E. Mansel, R. 
Margolese, E. B. Mendelson, I. A. Olivotto, J. P. Palazzo, and L. J. 
Solin, “Consensus conference on breast conservation,” Journal of the 
American College of Surgeons 203, pp. 198-207, 2006. 
[3] S. E. Singletary, “Surgical margins in patients with early-stage breast 
cancer treated with breast conservation therapy,” American journal of 
surgery 184, pp. 383-393, 2002. 
[4] B. Kreike, A. A. Hart, T. van de Velde, J. Borger, H. Peterse, E. 
Rutgers, H. Bartelink, and M. J. van de Vijver, “Continuing risk of 
ipsilateral breast relapse after breast-conserving therapy at long-term 
follow-up,” International journal of radiation oncology, biology, 
physics 71, pp. 1014-1021, 2008. 
[5] A. R. Miller, G. Brandao, T. J. Prihoda, C. Hill, A. B. Cruz, Jr., and I. T. 
Yeh, “Positive margins following surgical resection of breast 
carcinoma: analysis of pathologic correlates,” Journal of surgical 
oncology 86, pp. 134-140, 2004. 
[6] R. Jeevan, D. A. Cromwell, M. Trivella, G. Lawrence, O. Kearins, J. 
Pereira, C. Sheppard, C. M. Caddy, and J. H. van der Meulen, 
“Reoperation rates after breast conserving surgery for breast cancer 
among women in England: retrospective study of hospital episode 
statistics,” BMJ 345, e4505, 2012. 
[7] G. C. Balch, S. K. Mithani, J. F. Simpson, and M. C. Kelley, “Accuracy 
of intraoperative gross examination of surgical margin status in women 
undergoing partial mastectomy for breast malignancy,” The American 
surgeon 71, pp. 22-27; discussion pp. 27-28, 2005. 
[8] C. H. Lee and D. Carter, “Detecting residual tumor after excisional 
biopsy of impalpable breast carcinoma: efficacy of comparing 
preoperative mammograms with radiographs of the biopsy specimen,” 
AJR. American journal of roentgenology 164, pp. 81-86, 1995. 
[9] R. G. Pleijhuis, M. Graafland, J. de Vries, J. Bart, J. S. de Jong, and G. 
M. van Dam, “Obtaining adequate surgical margins in 
breast-conserving therapy for patients with early-stage breast cancer: 
current modalities and future directions,” Annals of surgical oncology 
16, pp. 2717-2730, 2009. 
[10] J. C. Cendan, D. Coco, and E. M. Copeland, 3rd, “Accuracy of 
intraoperative frozen-section analysis of breast cancer lumpectomy-bed 
margins,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons 201, pp. 
194-198, 2005. 
[11]  J. M. Jabbour, M. a. Saldua, J. N. Bixler, and K. C. Maitland, 
“Confocal Endomicroscopy: Instrumentation and Medical 
Applications,”  Annals of biomedical engineering, 2011. 
[12] S. Abeytunge, et al. "Confocal microscopy with strip mosaicing for 
rapid imaging over large areas of excised tissue." Journal of biomedical 
optics 18, 061227, 2013  
[13] T. P. Chang, D. R. Leff, S. Shousha, D. J. Hadjiminas, R. 
Ramakrishnan, M. Gudi, R. Al-Mufti, M. R. Hughes, A. Darzi, and G. 
Z. Yang. “Imaging of breast cancer morphology using probe-based 
confocal laser endomicroscopy: Towards a novel imaging tool for 
real-time intra-operative cavity scanning,” Eur J Surg Oncol. 2013 
(abstract in press) 
[14] M. Wallace, G. Y. Lauwers, Y. Chen, E. Dekker, P. Fockens, P. 
Sharma, and A. Meining, "Miami classification for probe-based 
confocal laser endomicroscopy," Endoscopy 43, pp.882-9, 2011. 
[15] R. C. Newton, S. V. Kemp, G. Z. Yang, D. S. Elson, A. Darzi, and P. L. 
Shah, “Imaging parenchymal lung diseases with confocal 
endomicroscopy,” Respiratory medicine 106, pp. 127-137, 2012. 
[16] N. Ayache, T. Vercauteren, G. Malandain, F. Oberrietter, N. Savoire, 
and A. Perchant, “Processing and mosaicing of fibered confocal 
images,” in Microscopic Image Analysis with Applications in Biology 
2006. 
[17] V. Becker, T. Vercauteren, C.H. von Weyhern, C. Prinz, R.M. Schmid, 
and A. Meining, “High-resolution miniprobe-based confocal 
microscopy in combination with video mosaicing (with video),” 
Gastrointest. Endosc., 66(5), pp.1001-1007, 2007.  
[18] T. Vercauteren, “Image registration and mosaicing for dynamic in vivo 
fibred confocal microscopy,” PhD Thesis, Ecole des Mines de Paris, 
Paris, France, 2008. 
[19] N. Ayache, T. Vercauteren, G. Malandain, F. Oberrietter, N. Savoire, 
and A. Perchant, “Processing and mosaicing of fibered confocal 
images,” in Microscopic Image Analysis with Applications in Biology 
2006. 
[20] D. P. Noonan, D. S. Elson, G. P. Mylonas, A. Darzi, and G. Z. Yang, 
“Laser-induced fluorescence and reflected white light imaging for 
robot-assisted MIS,” IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 56, 
pp. 889-92, 2009. 
[21] B. Rosa, B. Herman, J. Szewczyk, B. Gayet, and G. Morel, 
“Laparoscopic optical biopsies: in vivo robotized mosaicing with 
probe-based confocal endomicroscopy,” in Proc. of IROS’2011, San 
Francisco, California, September 25-30, 2011. 
[22] M. S. Erden, B. Rosa, J. Szewczyk, and G. Morel, “Mechanical design 
of a distal scanner for confocal microlaparoscope: a conic solution,” in 
Proc. of ICRA’2013, Karlsruhe, Germany, May 6-10, 2013. 
[23] R. C. Newton, D. P. Noonan, V. Vitiello,  J. Clark, C. J. Payne, J. 
Shang, M. Sodergren, A. Darzi, and G. Z. Yang. “Robot-assisted 
transvaginal peritoneoscopy using confocal endomicroscopy: a 
feasibility study in a porcine model,” Surgical endoscopy 26.9, 2012. 
[24] W. T. Latt, R. C. Newton, M. Visentini-Scarzanella, C. J.  Payne, D. P. 
Noonan, J. Shang, and G. Z. Yang, “A hand-held instrument to 
maintain steady tissue contact during probe-based confocal laser 
endomicroscopy,” IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 58, pp. 
2694-2703, 2011. 
[25] P. Giataganas, V. Vitiello, V. Simaiaki, E. Lopez, and G. Z. Yang 
“Cooperative in situ microscopic scanning and simultaneous tissue 
surface reconstruction using a compliant robotic manipulator,” in IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2013). 
[26] M. S. Erden, B. Rosa, J. Szewczyk, and G. Morel, “Understanding 
soft-tissue behavior for application to microlaparoscopic surface scan,” 
IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 60, pp. 1059-1068, 2013. 
[27] T. Vercauteren, A. Perchant, G. Malandain, X. Pennec, and N. Ayache, 
“Robust mosaicing with correction of motion distortions and tissue 
deformations for in vivo fibered microscopy,” Medical image analysis 
10, pp. 673-692, 2006. 
[28] B. Rosa, M. S. Erden, T. Vercauteren, B. Herman, J. Szewczyk and 
G.Morel. "Building large mosaics of confocal endomicroscopic images 
using visual servoing." IEEE transactions on biomedical engineering 
60, pp. 1041-9, 2013. 
[29] G. Goualher, A. Perchant, M. Genet, C. Cav, B. Viellerobe, B. Abrat, 
and N. Ayache, “Towards optical biopsies with an integrated fibered 
confocal fluorescence microscope,” in Medical Imaging Computing 
and Computer Assisted Intervention (MICCAI), 2004. 
[30] A. F. Gmitro and D. Aziz, “Confocal microscopy through a fiber-optic 
imaging bundle,” Optics Letters 18, pp. 565-567, 1993. 
[31] N. Bedard, T. Quang, K Schmeler, R. Richards-Kortum, T. Tkaczyk, 
“Real-time video mosaicing with a high-resolution microendoscope,” 
Biomedical Optics Express 3, pp 2428-35, 2012. 
 
3530
