Design of a 3D-Printed Soft Robot with Posture and Steering Control
Takuya Umedachi
1
and Barry A. Trimmer
2
Abstract—Both postural maintenance and rhythm genera-
tion are keys to generating adaptive behavior in all animals.
This is particularly evident in soft animals such as caterpillars,
worm and ﬂatworms that are capable of moving freely in
all directions and adopting intricate postures. They can also
exploit three-dimensional deformations and nonlinear struc-
tural properties to move in complex environments and to
respond to external forces. These capabilities have inspired
a new interest in using soft materials in robotic applications
but highly deformable materials create signiﬁcant design and
control problems. In previous work the authors have developed
a 3D-printed soft (3D-PS) robot, inspired by caterpillars, as a
platform to investigate methods for controlling soft robots. The
previous version of the robot is able to reproduce the different
gait patterns (inching and crawling motion) of caterpillars by
changing temporal difference in the rhythmic deformations of
different body parts. In this paper, we have added posture
control to the 3D-PS robot together with a steering capability.
Experimental results show that although posture and steering
are usually related, elastic and continuum properties of the soft
body can produce more complex and versatile behaviors.
I. INTRODUCTION
Animals are mainly composed of soft and rheologically
complex materials such as muscles, tendons, and layers of
skin-liketissues.Becauseofthesesoftmechanicalproperties,
animals are capable of storing elastic energy, cushioning
the shock, and conforming to complex shapes in the envi-
ronment. This is in sharp contrast to traditional rigid-body
robots and is expected to be a key factor in generating
adaptive behaviors in uncertain and dynamically changing
environments. Inspired by the difference between machines
and animals, many roboticists have paid a lot of attention
to soft robotics (e.g., locomotion of caterpillars and worms,
manipulation of octopus arm and elephant trunk [1], [2],
[3], [4], [5], [6]). An important principle in the design of
soft robots is that they need to implement morphological
computation [7], [8] or active sensing [9] to exploit the large
deformability and non-linearity of the soft body. Such robots
are expected to exceed the limitations of traditional hard and
rigid robotic systems. The challenge, however, remains to
design and control the soft body effectively.
Animal locomotion involves two important control mech-
anisms: postural maintenance and rhythm generation. These
1
T. Umedachi is research fellow of the Japan Society for the Promo-
tion of Science and research fellow of Japan Science and Technology
Agency (JST) CREST at Tufts University, Medford MA 02155, USA
and Hiroshima University, 1-3-1 Kagamiyama, Higashi-hiroshima 7398526,
JAPAN. takuya.umedachi at gmail.com
2
B.A.TrimmerisHenryBromﬁeldPearsonProfessorofNaturalSciences
and Director of Neuromechanics and Biomimetic Devices Laboratory at
Tufts University, Medford MA 02155, USA barry.trimmer at
tufts.edu
(a)
(b)
Fig. 1. (a) Model animal of soft robot, Manduca sexta and (b) new steering
model of Printed Soft robot (PS robot) proposed.
two controls are universal from lower forms of life (e.g.,
caterpillars, worm, ﬂatworm) to human beings [10], [11],
[12]. Actually, combining these controls on soft bodies
allows animals to generate surprisingly adaptive behavior in
three-dimensional space; not only can these bodies stretch
or compress they can also bend, wrinkle, buckle, twist,
droop, and creep along or against complex environment.
Furthermore, the viscoelastic properties of tissues produces
differentmechanicalresponsesatdifferentstrainrates,which
enables the body to respond differently as it interacts with
external forces from the environment. These interactions are
alsoaffectedbythebodyconﬁguration,whichinsoftanimals
can change dramatically with different postures. Hence, it
is necessary to develop a control system for soft robots in
which rhythm generation and posture maintenance are well
coordinated to exploit viscoelastic and continuum properties
of soft bodies.
Thus far, we have developed a 3D-printed soft (3D-PS)
robot [13] inspired by a highly deformable and relatively
simple-shape animal, the caterpillar (Manduca sexta). We
successfully demonstrated that the elastic and continuum
nature of soft robots makes it possible to create waves
of deformation along the body to generate two different
gaits (inching and crawling) even using a small number
of actuators. Furthermore, these large deformations can be
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2874
exploited to change frictional interactions with the substrate
during each step by bringing different materials into contact
with the environment. However, locomotion of the robot is
limited to forward and backward movement since the control
system only focuses on the rhythm generation.
The paper presents a new version of the 3D-PS robot
(Figure 1(b)) that is able to steer during the locomotion. Key
aspects for designing the soft robot are as follows: 1) well
coordinated deformation control including both left-right and
up-down bending; 2) locomotion capability exploiting the
up-down deformation of the body so as to reproduce the
two different locomotion gaits; 3) exploiting the dynamic re-
sponses (e.g., viscoelastic and continuum properties) of soft
materialstoinducenontrivialandversatilebehaviors.Theex-
perimental results shows that exploiting complex mechanical
dynamics of soft materials (i.e., viscoelastic and continuum
deformation) allows simple control to promote adaptive and
versatile behaviors. The results can also contribute to an
understanding of how a living system generates versatile and
adaptive behaviors with morphological computation [8] of
their bodies, in the sense that viscoelastic and continuum
deformation of soft materials can reduce, or take over, some
of the processes usually attributed to control.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.
Section II introduces the PS robot and presents a description
of its mechanical and control systems, which enable it to
move freely in all directions exploiting three dimensional
deformation of the body. Section III then presents some
of the important data obtained by the experiments. Finally,
sectionIVpresentstheconclusionsandrecommendationsfor
future work.
II. SOFT ROBOT DESIGN
A. Mechanical design for steering
The new version of 3D-PS robot is presented in Figure
2, which consists of a soft body with variable friction legs
and three coiled shape memory alloys (SMAs). The body
is printed using multi-material printable 3-D printer (Objet
Connex 500, 3-D printer) with two materials. One is soft
rubber-like Objet TangoPlus. Another is hard polypropylene-
like Objet VeroClear

. The structure with blocks aligned in
a straight line on the ventral side (see Figures 2(c), (e)) has
holes along the straight line to guide SMA coil inside and
allows the SMA coil to cool quickly. On the middle of the
dorsal side, the zigzag structure is designed (see Figure 2(d))
asso-calledajointpartonthesoftbody,whichmakesiteasy
to bend right-left for steering purpose.
The SMA coils (18 mm in compressed condition,
BMX100, Toki Corporation)
†
are tactfully embedded in the
structures and are electrically actuated. In particular, as
shown in Figure 2(c), three SMA coils were arranged side-

The mechanical properties of the materials are found in the following
url: http://www.stratasys.com.
†
The detail information of the SMA coils is found in the following url:
http://www.toki.co.jp/biometal/english/contents.php.
SMA1
SMA2
SMA3
Fig. 2. (a) Top view of the robot. (b) Side view of the robot. (c) Bottom
view and arrangement of the three SMAs inside robot body. One square is
1 cm x 1 cm in (a)-(c). The SMA coils are embedded overlapped along the
body axis. (d) Bird’s eye view of the cad data (the ventral side is top). (e)
Bird’s eye view of the cad data (the dorsal side it top).
Fig. 3. Side view of variable friction leg design. For description of the
mechanism, the leg was printed with white material instead of VeroClear
as hard part, and black material instead of TangoPlus as soft part in this
ﬁgure. Red line indicates high friction surface with the soft part and blue
line indicates low friction contact point with the hard part.
by-side and overlapped
‡
. Two SMA coils are located on the
rear part and one SMA coil is located on the front part. This
overlapped SMA alignment design allows for the robot both
to send up-down bending wave from one part to another
(i.e., from rear to front to move forward or front to rear to
move backward). In addition to this, the antagonistic SMA
alignment design enables to bend left and right around the
joint part.
B. Variable friction legs
Based on the previous version of PS robot [13], variable
friction legs are designed to switch friction with the ground
‡
EachendofeachSMAareconnectedwithelectriccablewithacrimping
terminal.
2875
Fig. 4. (a) Crawling locomotion gait and (b) inching locomotion gait. The
blue broken lines indicate lifted-up parts of the body whereas the red solid
lines indicate gripping parts of the body. The arrows indicate peaks of the
bending wave of the body. Since the arrow/arrows moving direction and
locomotion direction are the same, direct wave is conﬁrmed in the both
locomotion gaits.
for locomotion. The proposed design, as shown in Figure
3, uses two materials: TangoPlus (see-through rubber-like
substance) and VeroClear (see-through hard substance). The
TangoPlus has higher friction coefﬁcient than VeroClear. Use
of materials with two different friction coefﬁcients allows
the robot to switch friction with the ground on an edge of
the robot by bending the body (see Figure 3). This friction
switch mechanism allows the front/rear part to slip with the
substrateandstartthedirectwaveforlocomotion.Weprinted
the robot see-through materials for putting marks to measure
the positions of the markers.
C. Gait Generation
There are two types of locomotion on caterpillars (de-
pending on species, body weights, and positions of pro-
legs): inching and crawling gaits (see Fig. 4). With regard
to the both locomotion gaits, it is important to control
and generate up-down bending wave that starts from the
rear part and moves forward along the body (i.e., direct
wave). Inching gait is a modal wave with its wavelength
almost equal to the body length, whereas crawling gait is
a modal wave with its wavelength approximately half of
the body length or less than that. In order to reproduce the
caterpillar locomotion gaits on the caterpillar-like soft robot,
we used two SMA coils in our previous study and focused
on phase difference (i.e., time difference) of ﬁrings between
the two SMA coils
§
, and successfully generated inching and
crawling motion by changing the phase difference. (Please
goto https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0pHOaBnj1potoseethe
digest movie of [13].)
§
Of course, the other variables are available for designing the actuation
signals such as amplitude of the SMA actuators (voltage applied across the
SMA), frequency of actuation of SMA, and wavelength of SMA actuation
signal (decided by SMA coil arrangement).
Time (s)
SMA1 
SMA3 
255
0
0
SMA1 SMA2
Time (s)
T = 2.0 s
Phase difference: 
0.5 s 
0.5 s
PWM signals
(a)
(b)
PWM signals
SMA2 
SMA3 
Fig. 5. (a) Example of PWM signals generated by the microcomputer, and
(b) one period of the signal. Here, SMA1, SMA2, and SMA3 denote the
SMA coils described earlier in Figure 2. The time period T is ﬁxed at 2
s, and the actuation time is ﬁxed 0.5 s. The phase difference f denotes the
difference in time between actuation in front part (SMA1 and SMA3) and
in rear part (SMA2). In order to bend right and left for steering purpose,
on-state PWM values between SMA1 and SMA3 can be different.
In this paper, in order to build a steering model of the soft
robot, three SMA coils are embedded on the body. The two
SMA coils on the rear part (i.e., SMA1 and SMA3) generate
up-down bending motion and lift up the body part. One
example of PWM signals to three SMA coils is illustrated in
Figure 5. By changing on-state PWM values between SMA1
and SMA3, right-left bending around the joint part can be
achieved easily, which makes it possible to steer. After the
phase difference, the SMA coil on the front part (i.e., SMA2)
generates up-down bending motion, and the deformation on
the rear part shifts to the front part when the phase difference
is relatively small.
Behavioral change between inching and crawling depends
on how much deformation is generated per a ﬁxed time.
The parameters can be phase difference, force of SMA coils,
and viscoelastic properties of the soft material. The previous
study demonstrated that inching gait is generated when the
phase difference is less than 0.2 s and crawling gait is
generated when the phase difference is more than 0.2 s [13].
However, even setting phase difference 0.3 s in the previous
model, crawling motion is expected to change to inching
motion when electric current (which is governed with PWM
signal) to SMA coils is increased. Larger deformation is
slowly resolved due to the damping properties of the soft
materials. In this paper, we set 0.3 s as phase difference
since the crawling-inching behavioral change is expected by
changing PWM signals to SMA coils.
In order to realize such control system, we built open
loop control for the robot. The circuit board consists of
one Arduino Uno (Arduino, 2012) and three motor drivers
(TA7291P, Toshiba Co.) as shown in Figure 6. The Arduino
Uno was programed to generate PWM signals as input
signals to each motor drivers. Each motor driver switches on
and off external power supply (7 V) to each SMA embedded
2876
External power (7 V)
SMA1 SMA2 SMA3
Fig. 6. Circuit board consisting of Arduino Uno and three motor drivers
as control system for the soft robot.
x
 y
Fig. 7. Photograph of experimental setup. The robot is placed on a ﬂat
paper. One square is 1 cm x 1 cm.
in the robot. The time period of the SMA actuation signal is
set to 2 s
¶
.
III. EXPERIMENT
A. Experimental setup
To evaluate the validity of this new 3D-PS robot capable
of steering, we recorded the behavior of the robot changing
value of PWM values for SMA1 and SMA3 when f =0:3
s. Here, PWM1, PWM2, and PWM3 denote on-state PWM
values of SMA1, SMA2, SMA3, respectively (see Figure
5 as one example). PWM2 is ﬁxed to 180 during the all
trials. As can be seen in Figure 7, the robot was place
on a paper (letter size) positioned on a ﬂat substrate, and
programed to generate locomotion for 20 s (i.e., 10 periods).
The experiment was conducted in room temperature. The
trajectories of the center of the robot were recorded and,
both the distance traveled and angle of body conﬁguration
after 20 s, were measured. In order to measure these value,
three markers were put on the front, center, and rear part on
the dorsal side of the robot.
¶
Although the SMA coils have muscle-like properties, they do have
limitations as robotic actuators: their maximum actuation frequency is
limited by their cooling time. Due to this, we set one cycle time as 2 s
for cooling SMA coils, which seems to be sufﬁciently long, as we look the
motion (see the attached movie).
B. Experimental Results
Figure 8 represents the trajectories of the robot when
values of PWM1 and PWM3 are changed. Please note that
value of PWM3 is always not more than value of PWM1.
Thiseliminationisduetothesymmetryofthebodystructure.
When the values of PWM1 and PWM3 are the same, the
robot generates forward locomotion. By setting PWM value
ofSMA3is0,therobotsteersright.WhenvalueofPWM3is
increased, the robot changes the direction to go. This shows
that the robot has the capability of steering. Interestingly,
when PWM1 is 250 and PWM3 is 200, the robot is steering
‘left’ even though the value of PWM3 is less than the value
of PWM1.
Figure 9 represents distance traveled after 20 s, which are
calculated with data of the trajectories. As can be seen in the
ﬁgure, two data (PWM1=200, PWM3=200 and PWM1=250,
PWM3=200)aremuchhigherthantherest.Thisdifferenceis
caused by inching locomotion gaits, i.e., the robot can move
faster with inching motion than with crawling motion (see
the attachment video ﬁle). This indicates that the amount of
electric current to SMA coils per a ﬁxed time changes the
locomotion gait.
Figure 10 illustrates steering angle after 20 s, which are
calculated with data of the trajectories. Here the steering
angle Q is deﬁned as
Q=arctan(
x(t =20) x(t =0)
y(t =20) y(t =0)
); (1)
based on the angle deﬁnition in Figure 7. In order to conﬁrm
the controllability of the steering angle along the unbal-
ance between SMA1 and SMA3, we employed (PWM1-
PWM3)/PWM1 as the horizontal axis. As can be seen in the
ﬁgure, steering angle can be controlled when combination of
PWM1 and PWM3 is appropriate.
Figure 11 shows angle of body conﬁguration after 20 s
when values of PWM1 and PWM3 are changed. The angle
is measured with green two markers on the front and rear
dorsal sides of the body in Figure 2. When comparing Figure
8 and Figure 11, the angle of body conﬁguration and steering
angle can be different (in some data they are opposite). For
example, the robot is able rotate counterclockwise (left) on
the spot when SMA1 = 150, SMA3 = 50 (see the video
attachment). Another example is SMA1 = 250, SMA3 =
100; the robot moves right but the body rotates left (see the
video attachment). These experimental results indicate that
the robot exhibits very complex behaviors according to the
combination of the PWM values on the SMA coils in the
rear part.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We have presented a new steering version of highly
deformable 3-D PS robot. The soft body is designed in
ways that not only bends up-down to achieve direct wave for
locomotion but also bends right and left to steer. The right-
left bending is controllable by supplying unequal current to
antagonistic SMA coils on the rear part. The experimental
results shows that the robot is able to generate versatile
2877
oscillator system [14] may allow the soft body parts to
interact each other, which in turn generates reasonable and
adaptive behaviors according to the physical properties of
the body and environment. The modeling of such robots as
deformable and continuum structures and other tools needs
are to be explored. In parallel, 3-dimensional measurement
of the behavior will be needed to compare the numerical
data and experimental data. This will be beneﬁcial to obtain
richer information about the robot, in complex environments
and building simulation platforms for better robot design.
Finally,thevariationofdesignparameters(e.g.,placementof
SMA coils, actuation voltage, etc.) also needs to be explored.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the members of
the Neuromechanics and Biomimetic Devices Laboratory in
Department of Biology, Tufts University for their feedback.
This research is partially supported by the Tateishi Science
and Technology Foundation (No. 2021005) and NSF Award
(DBI-1126382).
REFERENCES
[1] S. Kim, C. Laschi, and B. Trimmer. Soft robotics: a bioinspired
evolution in robotics. Trends in Biotechnology 31, 287-294, 2013.
[2] M. W. Hannan and I. D. Walker. Kinematics and the implementation
of an elephant’s trunk manipulator and other continuum style robots.
Journal of Robotic Systems, 20(2):45-63, 2003.
[3] C. Laschi, M. Cianchetti, B. Mazzolai, L. Margheri, M. Follador, and
P. Dario. Soft robot arm inspired by the octopus. Advanced Robotics,
26(7):709-727, 2012.
[4] H. Lin, G. G. Leisk, and B. Trimmer. Goqbot: a caterpillar-inspired
soft-bodied rolling robot. Bioinspiration & biomimetics, 6(2)026007,
2011.
[5] S. Seok, C. D. Onal, R. Wood, D. Rus, and S. Kim. Peristaltic
locomotion with antagonistic actuators in soft robotics. In Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 1228-1233, IEEE, 2010.
[6] D. Trivedi, C. D. Rahn, W. M. Kier, and I. D. Walker. Soft robotics:
Biological inspiration, state of the art, and future research. Applied
Bionics and Biomechanics, 5(3):99-117, 2008.
[7] R. Pfeifer and J. C. Bongard. How the body shapes the way we think:
a new view of intelligence. MIT press, 2006.
[8] R. Pfeifer, F. Iida, and G. G´ omez. Morphological computation for
adaptive behavior and cognition. International Congress Series, 1291,
22-29, 2006, doi:10.1016/j.ics.2005.12.080
[9] K. Hosoda, Y. Yamasaki, and M. Asada. Sensing the texture of
surfaces by anthropomorphic soft ﬁngertips with multi-modal sensors.
Proceedings. 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on (Volume:1),
1:31-35, 2003.
[10] R. McNeill Alexander. Exploring Biomechanics: Animals in Motion.
W H Freeman & Co, ISBN-13: 978-0716750352, 1992.
[11] T. G. Deliagina and G. N. Orlovsly. Comparative neurobiology of
postural control. Current Opinion in Neurobiology, 12, 6, pp. 652-
657, 2002.
[12] S. Grillner, O. Ekeberg, A. Manira, A. Lansner, D. Parker, J. Tegner
and P. Wallen, Intrinsic function of a neuronal network —a vertebrate
central pattern generator, Brain Res. Rev. 26, 184-197, 1998.
[13] T. Umedachi, V. Viskas, and B. A. Trimmer. Highly Deformable 3-
D Printed Soft Robot Generating Inching and Crawling Locomotions
withVariableFrictionLegs.Proceedings.2013IEEE/RSJInternational
Conference on on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2013),
November 3-8, 2013.
[14] T. Umedachi, R. Idei, K. Ito, and A. Ishiguro. True-slime-mould-
inspired hydrostatically-coupled oscillator system exhibiting versa-
tile behaviours, Bioinspir. Biomim., 8, 035001, doi:10.1088/1748-
3182/8/3/035001, IOP Publishing, 2013.
2879
