Method of Improving WiFi SLAM
based on Spatial and Temporal Coherence
Shao-Wen Yang, Sharon Xue Yang, and Lei Yang
Intel Labs, Intel Corporation
Email:fshao-wen.yang, xue.yang, lei.t.yangg@intel.com
Abstract—The paper addresses the revisiting (loop closing)
problem of simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) by
investigating spatio-temporal coherence in inertial and perceptual
inputs to improve the robustness and convergence of SLAM. The
basic idea is to ﬁnd out coherent subsequences of conﬁdence in
trajectory to ensure against error-prone correspondences. It is
achieved by leveraging fuzzy matching based on local trajectory
structure and measurement similarity. Our approach does not
rely on any global features or propagation modeling, which can be
unreliable in the presence of gross errors and result in divergence.
Apart from WiFi SLAM, our approach can also be capable
of improving generic SLAM problems by leveraging spatio-
temporal coherence. The experiments show that our approach
can signiﬁcantly reduce the ambiguity in WiFi ﬁngerprinting,
and subsequently lead to performance improvement in terms of
mapping and localization.
I. INTRODUCTION
Deriving accurate indoor location has been an increasingly
important topic in the midst of mobile application blooming
[2, 6, 16, 1, 4]. Despite a decade of research and development
efforts, enabling indoor location capability remains a challeng-
ing topic. There is no single location system on the market
now that can provide sufﬁciently accurate indoor location and
has been widely deployed. The main limitations of existing
technologies are either in their performance inadequacy or
their requirements for substantial infrastructure deployment
efforts.
WiFi based indoor location technologies particularly at-
tracted a lot of attention in the past decade given the wide
deployment of wireless local area network (WLAN) infras-
tructure. There are three primary methods for location deter-
mination using WLAN. One method is based on propagation
models, using estimated degradation of signal strength over
distance in space from the known location of access points and
transmit power–such as SkyHook; the second method relies on
storing pre-recorded calibration WiFi measurement data (WiFi
ﬁngerprinting) in order to generate an RF map of a building
such as Ekahau and Qubulus; the third method utilizes the
measurement of WiFi radio wave time of ﬂight to measure
distance–time-of-arrival (ToA).
Among the three approaches, the second method relying on
WiFi ﬁngerprinting is most promising in providing accurate
indoor location–it has been shown that it can achieve meter
level accuracy as long as the pre-calibrated database has
sufﬁciently dense calibration points (i.e., meter grids). In
comparison, our test results show that indoor location derived
from SkyHook has median error of 11m and mean error of
25m. ToA type of approach can reach 3-5 meter accuracy
constrained by indoor multipath environment. On the other
hand, existing implementations of WiFi ﬁngerprinting (such as
Ekahau or Qubulus) require initial training to correlate each
location with corresponding WiFi ﬁngerprints (a set of mea-
sured RSSIs), which leads to substantial efforts to deploy such
location systems, especially when the calibration points are
dense. Also, the calibration often needs to be re-performed as
deployment environment changes. The substantial deployment
effort is one of the primary reasons why WiFi ﬁngerprinting
based location system has not been widely adopted, despite
the technology itself has been proposed for almost a decade.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Motivation
To reduce the deployment effort of WiFi ﬁngerprinting
while maintaining good location accuracy, our research adopts
the simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) frame-
work to integrate the inertial navigation system (INS) with
WiFi, with two objectives: a) The WiFi ﬁngerprint map for
the indoor environment can be automatically generated at
ﬁne granularity without human intervention. Thus, the human
deployment efforts for such location system can be minimized.
b) Through global optimization of GraphSLAM, we aim to
achieve meter level location accuracy.
Our approach improves the robustness of existing SLAM
systems to correspond identical locations while still avoiding
the use of signal propagation modeling. It is motivated by
the fact that ﬁngerprinting can be unreliable without a dense
location database, whereas signal strength based approaches
can rely on propagation modeling or signal strength inter-
polatability. Instead of introducing signal strength constraints
that can be unreliable due to the presence of attenuation and
fading, our approach conﬁnes error propagation by reliably
identifying revisiting with spatio-temporal coherence. This is
a key prerequisite to make location based services independent
of surrounding environment, and reduce as much human
intervention as possible.
B. Related Work
SLAM [12, 9, 5] is a well-researched area in mobile
robotics, which solves the problem of constructing a map for
unknown environment and, at the same time, determining the
location of a user with respect to the map. One of the key
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1991
problems in SLAM is loop closing, i.e., the ability to detect
when a user is revisiting some area that has been mapped
earlier.
Conventional SLAM schemes detect loop closure mostly
based on visual sensors Newman et al. [11], Milford [10],
which provide the perception of the physical environment
and have rich features to identify the revisited locations. In
WiFi based SLAM, however, there is no such visual sensor
available; loop closing detection becomes a major challenge
given the unstable nature of WiFi signal strengths. Recently,
there have been several WiFi based SLAM implementations,
such as Ferris et al. [7] and Huang et al. [8]. They both depend
on WiFi signal strength alone to infer the revisited locations,
either based on similar WiFi signal strengths, or based on
physical distance constraints derived from the assumed WiFi
signal propagation model. To differentiate, our approach lies
in the same category with Ferris et al. [7], which is ﬁnger-
printing only and does not rely on any propagation modeling
techniques. On the contrary, Huang et al. [8] used a signal
strength only technique, assuming interpolatability of WiFi
RSSIs within a spatial neighborhood.
Instead of relying on unreliable WiFi signal strength alone
for loop closure detection, in this paper, we propose a method
to detect revisited locations (note that we often use loop
closing and revisit interchangeably) for SLAM by analyzing
spatial and temporal coherence in inertial and WiFi inputs. The
rationale is that if it is a true loop closing, the local spatial and
temporal structure between two identiﬁed revisited locations
would be similar. Our approach improves the robustness and
location accuracy of existing WiFi based SLAM systems, as
we will show theoretically and empirically.
III. PROBLEM FORMULATION
SLAM is the process to build up a map for unknown
environment and, at the same time, determine the location
of a user with respect to the map, without prior knowledge.
WiFi SLAM provides a solution to crowd-sourcing, site sur-
vey or wardriving with as less prior knowledge and human
intervention as possible. The input of WiFi SLAM includes
inertial measurements and WiFi signal strengths. The problem
is challenging because of the poor stability and reliability
of consumer-grade inertial sensors and WiFi receivers. The
gross errors from inertial sensors can be far beyond meters as
errors are accumulated from time to time. The ambiguity in
WiFi ﬁngerprinting cannot provide a straightforward means to
correct the error reliably.
Fig. 1 illustrates the dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) for
WiFi SLAM. To ensure global consistency of the posterior
against divergence from gross errors, correctly inferring re-
visiting constraints are critical, whereas erroneous ones can
result in divergence. A bad constraint can easily make the
outcome far from the solution. Speciﬁcally, for sampling-based
approach like Rao-Blackwellized particle ﬁltering (RBPF), it
can fail due to the limited number of samples; for least squares
based approach like graph-based SLAM (GraphSLAM), it can
fail due to its least squares nature.
? ??1
 
? ? 
? ? 
? ?+1
 
? ?+1
 
? ??1
 ? ? ? ?+1
 
? 
? ??1,?+1
 
Fig. 1: DBN for SLAM. Each of the links represents a
causal relationship. Solid node represents latent variables (un-
observed, to be estimated) and shaded nodes are observable.
x
t
is the users location at time stept,m is the (signal strength)
map, z
t
is the WiFi signal strengths obtained at time step t,
u
t
is the inertial input at time stept, 
t;t
0 denotes a revisiting
constraint between locations at time steps t and t
0
.
Our motivation is to reliably extract revisiting constraints
from ﬁnding out the coherent subsequences in the entire user
trajectoryfx
1
;x
2
;;x
T
g. A fuzzy matching technique is
used, instead of exact match, to take into account the various
signal strength noises due to the presence of attenuation, fading
and changes of the environment. It also does not rely on
any global features, like absolute coordinates, which can be
unreliable as the trajectory drifting can be severe. It turns out
that our approach can be capable of re-calibrating the SLAM
posterior even if it has diverged.
IV. SPATIAL AND TEMPORAL COHERENCE
The loop closing detection is challenging in WiFi based
SLAM systems due to lack of features in determining the re-
visiting area. Without visual perception sensors, WiFi radio is
the only source of measurements associated with the physical
environment. However, WiFi signal is prone to large temporal
and spatial variations, and it often fails in serving as precise
loop closing constraints. The same WiFi measurements do not
necessarily map to the same physical location and vice versa.
Incorrectly identiﬁed revisits can lead to divergence of SLAM
optimization problem, extremely harmful for SLAM perfor-
mance. In this paper, in addition to WiFi signal constraints,
we explore the spatial and temporal coherence of location
estimates to improve the precision of loop closing detection
on top of exploring WiFi measurement similarity.
Sequence alignment is a technique commonly used in
bioinformatics for determining similar regions between two
nucleotide or protein sequences. Many bioinformatics tasks de
facto rely on successful alignments. In order to apply sequence
alignment techniques to SLAM, we ﬁrstly deﬁne similarity
(coherence) metrics in space and time. Once the metrics are
well deﬁned, we can perform sequence alignment on SLAM
posterior to extract coherent subsequences reliably.
1992
? ? 
? ?+1
 
? ??2
 
? ??1
 
? ?+2
 
? ? 
? ??1
 
? ??2
 
? ?+1
 
? ??
 
? ? ?
+1
 
? ? ?
?2
 
? ? ?
?1
 
? ? ?
+2
 
a sharp turn 
a smooth turn 
Fig. 2: Spatial coherence.u
t
represents the motion fromx
t
to
x
t+1
, u
t+1
represents the motion from x
t+1
to x
t+2
, and etc.
A. Fingerprint Similarity
WiFi ﬁngerprinting is a coarse indicator to capture the
similarity between two (almost) identical locations by quan-
tifying the similarity in WiFi signal measurements. In our
implementation, we use Euclidean norm to characterize the
dissimilarity between two WiFi RSSI measurements, though
other values should apply as well, which can be expressed as:
(z
t
;z
0
t
) = jjz
t
 z
0
t
jj
p
(1)
The underlying assumption is that same WiFi measurements
correspond to same physical locations. In reality, however,
the assumption usually does not hold. Due to small scale
fading (multipath propagation), two very close locations can
come with signiﬁcant different RSSI measurements. It turns
out that locations with the same WiFi RSSI measurements
are not necessarily at the same location. In our proposed
solution, WiFi ﬁngerprinting only serves as a ﬁrst level coarse
indicator, and does not rely on propagatioin modeling (or
sensor modeling) that is hardly reliable due to unknown
structure of environment and device diversity in access points.
To deal with the ambiguity in WiFi RSSI measurements, we
further incorporate a spatial coherence metric to capture the
similarity in trajectory (sequence of locations).
B. Spatial Coherence
Spatial coherence aims at distinguishing trajectories with
different local structures. A trajectory in indoor environment
can be highly constrained, particularly in ofﬁce-like envi-
ronments primarily comprising rooms and hallways. Thus,
similarity in both the spatial structure and the WiFi RSSI
measurements can give us a high conﬁdence in that a true
revisiting has happened.
We deﬁne angular features, as illustrated in Fig. 2, to capture
the local trajectory change that reﬂects the environmental
structure. To deal with disorder and non-atomicity of inertial
measurements, the feature is deﬁned at a multiple time step
scale manner. Disorder arises from the inaccurate detection of
motions and can result in time step drift, particularly while
making turns. Non-atomicity relates to the varying human
TABLE I: A local alignment example
Input sequences
Sequence #1 FTFTALILLAVAV
Sequence #2 FTALLLAAV
Local alignment result #1
Sequence #1 FTALILLAVAV
Sequence #2 FTAL-LLA-AV
Local alignment result #2
Sequence #1 LILLAV
Sequence #2 LLLAAV
Local alignment result #3
Sequence #1 FT
Sequence #2 FT
motions and the smoothing nature of inertial measurements.
Representing the feature at multiple time step scales makes
it possible to capture changes in trajectory at a higher level
of abstraction. Our current implementation uses a time step
window size of 5. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the spatial coherence
can be deﬁned given the window size, and used to characterize
the similarity between two subsequences. We deﬁne a scale-
invariant feature, a vector consisting of the angular deviations
at multiple time step scales which can be expressed as:
f
t
=
2
6
6
4
(u
t
) (u
t 1
)
(u
t
) (u
t 2
)
(u
t+1
) (u
t 1
)
(u
t+1
) (u
t 2
)
3
7
7
5
(2)
where (u
t
) denotes the angular component of u
t
.
The spatial dissimilarity between pairs of locations can
be captured based on the spatial coherence feature deﬁned
above using various metric. One example metric that our
current implementation uses is the mean difference between
spatial coherence features. The spatial coherence can serve as
a strong negative indicator to disambiguate the true revisiting
from the false revisiting identiﬁed by unreliable WiFi signal
measurements.
(f
t
;f
t
0) = mean(jf
t
 f
t
0j) (3)
The feature deﬁning on a time window of arbitrary size can
also apply, depending on the noise level of sensor. It turns
out that the more accurate the inertial input, the larger time
window we can apply to capture the spatial locality. The
spatial coherence can serve as a strong negative indicator to
disambiguate the true revisiting from the false counterparts
identiﬁed by unreliable WiFi RSSI measurements.
C. Temporal Coherence
Sequence alignment is a fuzzy matching technique working
with matches that may be not perfect when ﬁnding correspon-
dences. For example, protein or DNA matches may not be
exact; sentence matches can be imperfect due to verb tenses of
plurals. Spatial structure and WiFi ﬁngerprint matches are also
imperfect due to the presence of noise. Temporal coherence
captures the local structure similarity in consecutive time steps
1993
  
? ??1
 
? ? 
? ? 
? ?+1
 
? ?+1
 
? ??1
 ? ? ? ?+1
 
? 
  
Sequence 
Alignment 
  
? ??1,?+1
 
Fig. 3: DBN for stSLAM
based on WiFi ﬁngerprinting and spatial coherence. That is,
due to the highly constrained indoor physical environment, if
revisiting has occurred at one physical location at a particular
time step, it is likely that several time steps following that will
be revisited locations as well. We apply sequence alignment
techniques to extract coherent subsequences. In particular,
local alignment extracts matching sequence of all possible
lengths. One example of sequence alignment is illustrated in
Tab. I for ease of understanding, where the similarity between
pairs of entries (letters) is simply deﬁned by equality. For
our proposed SLAM system, however, each of the entries is
a compound of a spatial location and a set of WiFi RSSI
measurements, and the similarity between pairs is deﬁned
jointly by WiFi similarity and spatial coherence.
A threshold on matched sequence length is used as a
temporal coherence measure to gauge matching conﬁdence
level. The longer the matched sequence, the more possible
it is a positive match. Note that the spatial constraint is
deﬁned in a way that is independent of motion direction. We
perform sequence alignment of a sequence against itself and
its reverse to identify revisiting from subsequences moving
in same and opposite directions. This length constraint is a
tradeoff between precision and recall (i.e., detection rate), and
can depend on the noise level of inertial and WiFi RSSI
measurements. In our present implementation, the matched
sequence length threshold is 5 time steps.
Our approach is based on Smith-Waterman local alignment
algorithm [13], which takes as input the (logical) conjunction
of WiFi ﬁngerprinting and spatial coherence dissimilarities,
and output the revisiting sequences of high conﬁdence. The
sequence alignment algorithm combines all of the sensory
information and generates SLAM constraints using matched
sequences, instead of fragmented, unreliable ones. The SLAM
algorithm then incorporates all the constraints, either from sen-
sor data or sequence alignment, to obtain a globally consistent
solution.
In our algorithm, we also assume location estimates within
a pre-deﬁned time (step) window are dissimilar and search
for similar sequence only outside of this window. This search
window depends on moving speed of the user and the scale of
the physical environment. Fig. 3 shows the DBN for spatio-
temporally coherent WiFi SLAM.
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Spatial Coherence WiFi Fingerprinting 
50 100 150 200 250 300 350 400
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Fig. 4: Similarity matrices of WiFi ﬁngerprinting and spatial
coherence
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We used the GraphSLAM algorithm [15] integrating inertial
sensor measurements with WiFi measurements, and compare
the performance with or without the proposed spatio-temporal
coherence loop closing detection algorithm. The thresholds
for WiFi ﬁngerprinting and spatial coherence are 10dbm
and 60

, respectively, which are determined empirically. For
local alignment of temporal coherence, the three parameters
(weights), match, mismatch and indel, used for deter-
mining matches are +1, 2 and 2, respectively. We tested
our algorithm against two data sets: real WiFi data with simu-
lated inertial data, and real inertial and WiFi data. For inertial
and WiFi measurements, we used the STMicro iNEMO v2
evaluation board STEV AL-MKI062V2, and an ASUS netbook
equipped with an Intel 5300 WiFi card, respectively.
A. Simulated Data Set
In this experiment, a data set of 650m travel distance
containing 500 distinct measurements is used. It is collected
in an ofﬁce environment with ground truth locations manually
annotated. In this data set, we can achieve a 96% precision
(number of true positive samples out of all positive samples).
In comparison, without incorporating spatio-temporal coher-
ence, the precision is around 30%, hardly useful for realistic
applications.
Fig. 4 illustrates the similarity matrices for spatial and
temporal coherences using data from an ofﬁce environment.
The darker the entry, the higher the similarity. As can be seen
from WiFi ﬁngerprinting, we can visually identify a number of
matched sequences in diagonals or reverse diagonals. On the
other hand, the similarity matrix for spatial coherence comes
with a quite regular grid pattern, as most of the time the travel
directions are straight in an ofﬁce environment. Fig. 5 shows
the identiﬁed revisiting from spatio-temporal coherence. In this
example, there are 36 out of 37 true revisits–a 97% accuracy.
It is in particular important for GraphSLAM due to its least
squares nature in which a single vulnerable revisit can result
in divergence.
Fig. 6 depicts the relationship between WiFi ﬁngerprinting
threshold and the performance of our approach, including pre-
1994
?20
?15
?10
?5
0
5
?5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
meter
meter
(a) True revisits
?20
?15
?10
?5
0
5
?5
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
meter
meter
(b) False revisits
Fig. 5: Revisits from spatio-temporal coherence. The graph representation of vertices in circles and edges in lines are the input
trajectories of three subsets in difference colors–cyan, magenta, and yellow. Lines in red connect revisited locations from our
approach. A slight deviation in z-axis is only used for better visualization.
cision, recall, and F-score. This demonstrates a nice property
of our approach that WiFi ﬁngerprinting threshold serves as a
tradeoff between precision and recall. As a matter of fact that
false revisiting constraints can probably lead to divergence,
we chose 10dbm, a value of around 3-percentile. As can be
seen, our approach can achieve a near 100% precision to
ensure against divergence without the use of spatial locations
in absolute coordinates. Depending on the noise level of
the inertial sensors and WiFi measurements, a even looser
threshold for ﬁngerprinting will also apply.
B. Pedometric Data Set
For the data set with both real inertial and WiFi RSSI data,
we manually marked 29 locations with a ﬁxed step length
of approximately 50cm in a room. A user carried the initial
sensors board and the netbook, and walk around the room
following the marked locations three times counterclockwisely.
We implemented a pedometer algorithm based on inertial
sensor measurements to estimate the motion trajectory of the
user.
Fig. 7 gives the estimated trajectory from using INS dead
reckoning alone, from using SLAM without spatio-temporal
coherence and from using SLAM with our proposed spatio-
temporal coherence, where the user has walked over the
marked trajectory for three repeated loops in the experiment.
As can be seen in Fig. 7a, the estimated trajectory from INS
deviates from the true trajectory and three repeated loops drift
away from each other in the estimated trajectory. Conventional
SLAM, depicted in Fig. 7b, improves the performance to some
extent, but three loops still largely deviate from each other. Our
approach, shown in Fig. 7c correctly identiﬁes most revisited
locations and three loops converge well.
The location estimation error in relevance to the ground
truth is shown in Tab. II. The absolute errors are calculated
from aligning the estimated trajectory with the ground truth
trajectory for which minimum least squares errors are ob-
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
50
100
percentile (%)
precision (%)
 
 
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
50
percentile (%)
recall (%)
 
 
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
20
40
percentile (%)
F
1
 score (%)
 
 
0 5 10 15 20 25
0
20
40
percentile (%)
 
 
2?norm
fingerprinting threshold
our approach
fingerprinting only
our approach
fingerprinting only
our approach
fingerprinting only
Fig. 6: Performance quantiﬁcation
TABLE II: Quantitative comparison
Error (m) INS only SLAM Our approach
Absolute
RMS 1.5122 1.1473 0.9181
Mean 1.3684 1.0217 0.8695
Std. 0.6472 0.5294 0.2962
Relative
RMS 0.9362 0.4534 0.1378
Mean 0.7666 0.3999 0.1014
Std. 0.5404 0.2150 0.0939
tained, so that the metric can be well deﬁned independent
of coordinate systems. Apart from the absolute metric, we
also quantify the performance with the subjective-objective
technique [3] representing the accuracy of revisiting detection.
The metric can characterize the local structure of trajectories
independent of coordinate systems. The threshold deﬁning
spatial neighborhood for locations is 0.5065m, the average
step length. Note that all the output trajectories are scaled
so that the total distances traveled are the same with the
ground truth [8]. As we can see, our proposed SLAM leads
to smaller location error in both RMS and mean, and much
1995
(a) INS only (b) SLAM (c) Our approach
Fig. 7: Performance comparison. The solid lines are the trajectories, and the dashed lines indicate correspondences between
estimated and true locations.
smaller standard deviation.
VI. CONCLUSION
We have introduced the novel use of spatio-temporal coher-
ence to improve WiFi SLAM. This is achieved by leverag-
ing fuzzy matching techniques to associate spatio-temporally
coherent subsequences of the SLAM trajectory. WiFi ﬁnger-
printing is a coarse indicator of revisiting, and the spatial
coherence serves as a strong negative indicator to disambiguate
between genuine and vulnerable revisits. Temporal coherence
is a means for both WiFi ﬁngerprinting and spatial coherence
to work together. Our approach is particularly useful in indoor
environments, where trajectories can often reﬂect the structure
of the physical environment. While outdoor positioning can
generally be achieved using GPS, indoor location awareness
remains challenging, requiring signiﬁcant infrastructure de-
ployment and extensive wardriving. Robust WiFi SLAM is
a key prerequisite to reduce as much the human intervention
as possible to automate the creation and update of location
signature database. The ample experiments show that our
approach can lead to signiﬁcant performance improvement
over conventional SLAM techniques. The future work includes
using robust SLAM algorithms Sunderhauf and Protzel [14] to
improve the robustness and, as a result, precision and recall.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Azizyan, I. Constandache, and R. R. Choudhury.
SurroundSense: mobile phone localization via ambience
ﬁngerprinting. In Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. Mobile Comput-
ing and Networking, 2009.
[2] P. Bahl and V . N. Padmanabhan. RADAR: An in-building
RF-based user location and tracking system. In Proc.
Annu. IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Communications, 2000.
[3] M. Bowling, D. Wilkinson, A. Ghodsi, and A. Milstein.
Subjective localization with action respecting embedding.
In Robotics Research: Results of the 12th Int. Symp.,
pages 190–202, 2005.
[4] K. K. Chintalapudi, A. P. Iyer, and V . Padmanabhan.
Indoor Localization Without the Pain. In Proc. Annu.
Int. Conf. Mobile Computing and Networking, 2009.
[5] H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey. Simultaneous Lo-
calisation and Mapping (SLAM): Part I The Essential
Algorithms. Robot. Autom. Magazine, 13:99–110, 2006.
[6] A. L. et al. WiFi-SLAM using Gaussian process latent
variable models. In Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Pervasive
Computing, pages 116–133, 2005.
[7] B. D. Ferris, D. Fox, and N. Lawrence. WiFi-SLAM
using Gaussian process latent variable models. In Proc.
Int. Joint Conf. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, pages 2480–2485,
2007.
[8] J. Huang, D. Millman, M. Quigley, D. Stavens, S. Thrun,
and A. Aggarwal. Efﬁcient , Generalized Indoor WiFi
GraphSLAM. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
2011.
[9] J. J. Leonard and H. F. Durrant-Whyte. Mobile robot
localization by tracking geometric beacons. IEEE Trans.
Robot. Autom., 7(3):376–382, 1991.
[10] M. Milford. Visual route recognition with a handful of
bits. In Proc. of Robotics Science and Systems, 2012.
[11] P. Newman, D. Cole, and K. Ho. Outdoor slam using
visual appearance and laser ranging. In Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., 2006.
[12] R. Smith, M. Self, and P. Cheeseman. Estimating
uncertain spatial relationships in robotics. Autonomous
Robot Vehicles, 1:167–193, 1990.
[13] T. F. Smith and M. S. Waterman. Identiﬁcation of
Common Molecular Subsequences. J. of Molecular
Biology, 147:195–197, 1981.
[14] N. Sunderhauf and P. Protzel. Switchable constraints
vs. max-mixture models vs. rrr a comparison of three
approaches to robust pose graph slam. In Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2013.
[15] S. Thrun and M. Montemerlo. The GraphSLAM Al-
gorithm with Applications to Large-Scale Mapping of
Urban Structures. Int. J. of Robotics Research, 25(5-6):
403–429, 2006.
[16] M. Youssef and A. Agrawala. The Horus WLAN location
determination system. In Proc. Int. Conf. Mobile Systems,
Applications, and Services, 2005.
1996
