Autonomous Penetration Detection for Bone Cutting Tool Using
Demonstration-based Learning
Takayuki Osa
1
, Christian Farid Abawi
2
, Naohiko Sugita
1
,
Hirotaka Chikuda
3
, Shurei Sugita
3
, Hideya Ito
3
, Toru Moro
3
, Yoshio Takatori
3
, Sakae Tanaka
3
and Mamoru Mitsuishi
1
Abstract— In orthopedic surgery, bone-cutting procedures
are frequently performed. However, bone-cutting procedures
are very risky in cases where vital organs or nerves exist
beneath the target bones. In such cases, surgeons are required
to determine the depth of the penetration into the bone by
using only their haptic senses. Thus, we developed a hand-
held bone-cutting-tool system that detects the penetration of the
cutting material. The developed system autonomously detects
the penetration before total penetration and stops the actuation
of the cutting tool, leaving a very thin remnant of work material.
The developed system estimates the cutting resistance by using
its motor’s current and rotational speed. On the basis of
data collected preoperatively, the system estimates the cutting
state by using a support vector machine (SVM). According
to the SVM outputs, the system detects the penetration of
the work material and autonomously stops the actuation of
the cutting tool. The proposed method was veriﬁed through
experiments, and the results showed that the developed system
successfully detected the penetrations of work materials and
stopped autonomously immediately before total penetration.
This study showed that the autonomous detection of bone
penetration with a hand-held bone-cutting tool is feasible by
using the proposed scheme.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cutting and drilling bones are very common procedures in
orthopedic surgery. However, bone-cutting procedures can be
very risky in some cases where vital organs or nerves exist
beneath the target bones. In such cases, surgeons are required
to determine the depth of the penetration into the bone by
using only their haptic senses. For example, in spine surgery,
some parts of the spine are eliminated to release the pressure
on spinal cord nerves. In this procedure, a surgeon needs to
make holes in the spine by using bone-cutting tools to break
off the target bones (see Fig. 1). When penetrating the bone
using a cutting tool, the surgeon is required to recognize the
extent of total penetration (Fig. 2). This recognition requires
*This work was supported in part by the Global COE Program, Global
Center of Excellence for Mechanical Systems Innovation by the Ministry
of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Grant-in-Aid for
Scientiﬁc Research(S) 23226006, Grant-in-Aid for JSPS fellows Number
25-7106, and Japan Ministry Internal Affairs and Communications, Strategic
Information and Communication R&D Promotion Programme 121803005.
1
T. Osa, N. Sugita and M. Mitsuishi are with Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, The University of Tokyo, 113-8656 Tokyo, Japan
osa|sugi|mamoru@nml.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
C. F. Abawi is with Fraunhofer Institute for Manu-
facturing Engineering and Automation, Stuttgart, Germany
christian.abawi@gmail.com
3
H. Chikuda, H. Itou, T. Moro, S. Sugita, Y . Takatori and S. Tanaka are
with The University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan
Fig. 1. Example of procedure for spinal surgery. Surgeons cut and penetrate
the spine, and the target part of the spine is broken off.
Fig. 2. In spinal surgery, surgeons need to recognize bone penetration and
stop cutting immediately afterward. Otherwise, vital nerves under the spine
would be damaged.
that a surgeon have skill and experience, and the procedure
can be time-consuming and fatiguing. Therefore, if the bone-
cutting tool could autonomously detect the penetration of the
bone and stop autonomously, the system would improve the
safety of bone-cutting procedures and reduce the physical
and mental fatigue to surgeons.
To improve the safety of cutting and drilling bones in
orthopedic surgery, several schemes to detect the penetration
of bones have been proposed [1], [2], [3], [4]. These studies
proposed penetration detection schemes for robotic surgery
using a robotic manipulator. However, at present, most or-
thopedic surgery operations are performed by surgeons using
a hand-held tool system. Therefore, a penetration detection
scheme for a hand-held bone-cutting tool could be more
practical and useful in actual clinical use.
In this study, we developed a hand-held bone-cutting-tool
system that detects the penetration of a work material and
autonomously stops its actuation (Fig. 3). The developed
system estimates the cutting resistance online by using the
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 290
Fig. 3. Bone-cutting tool (Nakanishi Inc., Japan). The autonomous
penetration detection was implemented on its controller.
motor current and rotational speed of the cutting tool. To
detect the penetration of the work material, a demonstration-
based learning approach was employed. Speciﬁcally, the
developed system estimates the cutting resistance online by
using a recursive least square (RLS) method; it estimates
the cutting states by using a support vector machine (SVM).
According to the SVM outputs, the system detects the
penetration of the work material online. The proposed control
scheme was implemented on a bone-cutting-tool system that
is in clinical use. By exploiting the elasticity of bones,
the developed system detects their penetration immediately
before total penetration. Although we used a round ﬂuted bur
in this study, the proposed scheme can be easily applied to
bone-cutting tools with other shapes, such as drills and saws.
In addition, the proposed scheme can be applied to cutting
processes other than orthopedic surgery.
This paper is structured as follows. The next section
describes the related studies. Section III gives an overview
of the proposed method and the details of the proposed algo-
rithm. Section IV describes experiments that were conducted
to evaluate the developed system. Finally, the last section
describes the conclusions of this study and outlines the future
work.
II. RELATED STUDIES
Several studies have been reported on detecting the pene-
tration of bones in orthopedic surgery. Allotta et al. proposed
a scheme to detect the bone penetration in robotic orthopedic
surgery [1]. They acquired a proﬁle of the thrust force and
used the thrust force and its derivative for penetration detec-
tion. Ong et al. proposed a method to detect the penetration
of bones in drilling performed by using the thrust force
[2]. They employed a Kalman ﬁlter to make the system
robust against the ﬂuctuation of the measured force, and the
method was veriﬁed using a motorized setup. Ping-Liang
et al. developed a system to detect that a cutting tool had
ﬁnished cutting through a bone for robotic artiﬁcial knee joint
replacement [3]. Their scheme was developed for bilateral
force control by using a master-slave system. Hu et al.
developed a robotic spinal surgical system with drilling state
recognition [4]. Their system recognized the drilling state on
the basis of the measured force and detected the penetration
of bones.
Fig. 4. Procedure of developed system.
In these studies, the use of the thrust force for detecting
the bone penetration was very common. However, the thrust
force ﬂuctuates according to the motion of the cutting tool.
Thus, it was expected that using the thrust force of the cutting
tool would be inefﬁcient for detecting the penetration with a
hand-held cutting tool. Therefore, we used the motor current
and rotational speed of the cutting tool to estimate the cutting
state.
In addition, previous studies used some thresholds to
detect the change in the state. However, the determination of
these thresholds can be heuristic and time-consuming. There-
fore, we employed a demonstration-based learning approach
to detect the penetration. The developed system estimates the
cutting state by using an SVM that can be trained without
excessive effort by using recorded data.
III. METHOD
A. Overview of Proposed Method
The procedure of the developed system is summerized
in Fig. 4. Preoperatively, it is necessary to collect data for
training an SVM to estimate the cutting state. The motor
current and rotational speed of the cutting tool and the cutting
resistance have to be recorded in this step. The developed
system estimates the cutting resistance online by using RLS.
By using the recorded data, the SVM are trained to estimate
the cutting states. The system intraoperatively measures the
motor current and rotational speed of the cutting tool and
estimates the cutting resistance. We use these values as the
input feature vector of the SVM. Thereafter, the state of
the bone cutting is estimated by using the SVM, and the
actuation of the bone-cutting tool is controlled accordingly.
In this framework, it was not necessary to attach additional
sensors to the cutting tool, which made the developed system
as simple as possible. However, this framework can easily
be extended for a multisensor system by expanding the input
of the SVM. By using this demonstration-based learning
approach, the system can easily learn a nonlinear decision
boundary for detecting the penetration of a work material.
291
Fig. 5. Round ﬂuted bur PDS-2CM-40 (Nakanishi Inc.). The diameter of
the cutting edge is 4 mm.
B. System Setup
We developed a bone-cutting-tool system based on a bone-
cutting-tool system provided by Nakanishi Inc., Japan. In this
study, we used a round ﬂuted bur PDS-2CM-40 (Nakanishi
Inc., Japan) as a cutting tool (Fig. 5). We employed this
cutting tool because it is widely used clinically. The control
unit of the cutting tool, Primado NE151 (Nakanishi Inc.,
Japan), was customized to achieve remote control from an
externally connected computer. The control unit communi-
cates with an externally connected computer using serial
communication and sends the motor current and rotational
speed of the cutting tool to the computer every 50 ms. The
algorithm to estimate the cutting resistance and cutting state
is implemented in the externally connected computer. When
the computer detects the penetration, it sends a signal to the
control unit to stop the cutting tool.
C. Estimation of Cutting Resistance
The following linear expression was used to estimate the
cutting resistance:
I =kN (1)
where I is the motor current of the cutting tool, k is the
cutting resistance andN is the rotational speed of the cutting
tool. To estimate the cutting resistance, we employed RLS.
Although the measured raw data of the motor current and the
rotational speed of the cutting tool are noisy, using RLS for
the estimation enabled us to estimate the cutting resistance
robustly against white noises.
In the literature dealing with haptic exploration, methods
to estimate contact impedance have been extensively inves-
tigated [5], [6], [7], [8]. In these studies, the use of RLS
is very common. The problem of estimating the coefﬁcients
can be expressed in the following equation:
d=W
T
u (2)
where d is the output value, u is the input vector, and W
is the vector of the coefﬁcients that need to be estimated In
RLS, the following equations are computed recursively.
K
n
=
P
n 1
u
n
+u
T
n
P
n 1
u
n
W
n
= W
n 1
+K
n
 
d
n
 u
T
n
W
n 1

P
n
=
1

 
I K
n
u
T
n

P
n 1
(3)
where u
n
is the nth measurement of the input vector, d
n
is
thenth measurement of the output value, andW
n
represents
the coefﬁcients estimated at the nth step. In our system, we
set the following:
d = I
u = N (4)
With this setting, W
n
is regarded as the estimated cutting
resistance. Therefore, we obtain the estimated cutting resis-
tance as:
^
k =W
n
(5)
where K
n
and P
n
are intervening variables, and P
1
is
initialized as an identity matrix. In (3),  is a forgetting
factor. If we set the forgetting factor lower, we can use larger
weights for a newer measurement. In our system, we set the
forgetting factor to =0:9.
D. Recognition of Penetration
We employed an SVM to estimate the cutting state [9],
[10]. The SVM was trained to output one of two labels,
namely, “cutting” and “not cutting”. The SVM outputs
“cutting” when the cutting tool cuts materials, and the SVM
outputs “not cutting” when the cutting tool is actuated but
nothing is being cut. To allow an inseparable training data
set, we employed a C-SVM for our system [10]. The nonlin-
ear decision boundaries can be learned using the SVM with
a kernel trick [11]. In the developed system, we employed
a radial basis function k(x
i
;x
j
) as a kernel function. This
radial basis function is expressed as follows:
k(x
i
;x
j
)=exp

 kx
i
 x
j
k
2

(6)
To estimate whether or not the cutting tool is cutting a
material, we used the motor current and rotational speed of
the cutting tool, along with the estimated cutting resistance.
Therefore, we set the input feature vector of the SVM as
x = [I;N;
^
k]
T
, where I is the motor current, N is the
rotational speed, and
^
k is the estimated cutting resistance.
The proposed scheme to detect the bone penetration and
control the cutting tool is summarized in Algorithm 1. The
SVM estimates the cutting state at every sampling time. The
system counts the cutting duration for the work material,
and when the SVM outputs “not cutting” after a certain
period of cutting, the system determines that the cutting
tool has penetrated the work material. In this scheme, the
SVM needs to estimate only whether or not the cutting tool
is cutting something. Therefore, the stiffness of the work
material used for the training data does not signiﬁcantly
affect the performance of the SVM.
Although the SVM does not directly recognize the moment
of the penetration of the work material, the system is
expected to detect the penetration and stop the actuation
of the cutting tool immediately before the total penetration.
The mechanism of detecting the penetration immediately
before total penetration is shown in Fig. 6. When the residual
thickness of the work material is large, the work material is
stiff enough to be cut by the cutting tool. However, when
the residual thickness is small, the work material deﬂects
under the load imposed by the cutting tool, and the cutting
292
Algorithm 1 Algorithm for Penetration Detection
While Actuation of the bone cutting tool is on
Dof
1. Measure the motor current and the rotational speed of the
cutting tool
2. Estimate the cutting resistance
3. Estimate the cutting state
if SVM outputs “cutting” then
count
cut
++
else
if count
cut
>c
stop
then
Actuation of the bone cutting tool stops.
else
count
cut
=0
end if
end if
g
Fig. 6. Mechanism to detect penetration. When the work material became
thin, it deﬂected under the load from the cutting tool, and the cutting tool
could not cut the work material.
tool spins without cutting the material. Thereafter, the system
recognizes the penetration of the work material and stops the
actuation of the cutting tool. Thus, the system is expected
to detect the penetration of the work material before total
penetration and stop actuation of the cutting tool, leaving
a very thin remnant of work material. However, the timing
of the penetration detection depends on the stiffness of the
work material because it relies on the timing of the deﬂection
of the work material. Therefore, the performance of the
penetration detection method must be tested using a material
with stiffness that is comparable to that of human bones.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To examine the performance of the developed system,
we performed two experiments. In the ﬁrst experiment, the
cutting tool was ﬁxed, and the cutting material was moved
horizontally by using an XY stage, as shown in Fig. 7. In
the second experiment, the cutting tool was held by a human
operator, and the performance was examined in a practical
setup.
A. Experiments in Motorized Setup
1) Experimental Setup: To evaluate the penetration-
detection performance, we performed experiments by using
the experimental setup shown in Fig. 7. To evaluate the
Fig. 7. Experimental setup for motorized experiment.
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF EXPERIMENT FOR PENETRATION DETECTION
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION.
Rotational speed 1000 [rev/min]
Feed speed 0.3 [mm/s]
Plate thickness 2, 3, 4, 5 [mm]
Cutting angle 20, 40, 60, 80 [deg]
developed system in a reproducible manner, the cutting tool
was ﬁxed on the stage, and the work material was moved
horizontally by using the XY stage. In this experiment,
plastic plates from Sawbones Inc. (USA) were used. These
plates are produced as an alternative test material to human
cortical bone. The parameters of this experiment are listed
in Table I. In this experiment, the thickness of the work
material was changed to investigate the effect of its stiffness.
In addition, the cutting angle , which is shown in Fig. 7,
was changed to investigate the effect of the angle between
the feed direction of the cutting tool and the surface of the
work material.
The procedure for this experiment was as follows. First,
to acquire training data for the SVM, work materials were
cut and penetrated without the proposed penetration de-
tection under all the conditions listed in Table I, and the
motor current and rotational speed of the cutting tool and
the estimated cutting resistance were recorded. Second, the
SVM was trained using all of the recorded data. Third, the
work material was cut with penetration detection under the
conditions listed in Table I. Under each condition, the work
material was cut three times.
2) Experiment Results: An example of the recorded data
for training the SVM is shown in Fig. 8. The labels of each
time step were set manually on the basis of observation.
At the time of penetration, the estimated cutting resistance
decreased remarkably.
To evaluate the performance of the SVM, we performed
a four-fold cross validation. The results are listed in Table
II. As listed in Table II, the SVM successfully classiﬁed the
two classes, namely, “cutting” and “not cutting.”
The recorded data when the penetration was detected
are shown in Fig. 9. The system detected the penetration
successfully when the residual thickness of the work material
became small and the estimated cutting resistance decreased.
293
Fig. 8. Example of recorded data for training SVM: plate thickness: 4 mm
and cutting angle: 40

.
TABLE II
RESULTS OF CROSS VALIDATION.
No. “cutting” “not cutting”
1 100.0% 93.8%
2 100.0% 93.4%
3 97.7% 96.5%
4 96.0% 81.8%
Ave. 98.4% 91.4%
The penetration-detection performance in this experiment
is shown in Fig. 10 and 11, where we regard the detection as
successful in a case where the work material was left under
the cutting tool, as shown in Fig. 12. Figure 10 shows the
ratio of accurate penetration detection. The results show that
the developed system successfully detected the penetration
under most conditions. However, when the work material was
2 mm and the cutting angle was 20

, the system occasionally
failed to detect the penetration.
Figure 11 shows the residual thickness of the work mate-
rial when the system detected the penetration. As shown in
Fig. 11, the residual thickness of the material was smaller
under the condition of a thinner work material. In addition,
the residual thickness of the work material was smaller under
the condition of a smaller cutting angle.
3) Discussion: As we expected, the developed system
detected the penetration of the work material immediately
before its total penetration. This feature is very suitable for
orthopedic surgery such as spine surgery and neurosurgery.
In such surgery, surgeons do not need to penetrate the
target bone if it is possible to break off the bone by hand.
In addition, if the system detects the penetration before
Fig. 9. Recorded data when penetration was detected in experiment.
The system detected the penetration and stopped autonomously when the
estimated cutting resistance decreased. The experiment conditions: plate
thickness: 4 mm and cutting angle: 40

.
Fig. 10. Accuracy of penetration detection.
294
Fig. 11. Residual thickness of work material when system detects its
penetration. Negative numbers represent penetration detection failures, and
the norm of the negative number means the distance between the edge of
the cutting tool and the back side of the work material.
Fig. 12. Example of successful penetration detection. The actuation of the
cutting tool autonomously stopped, leaving a thin remnant of work material.
total penetration, surgeons do not have to run the risk of
damaging vital organs. Therefore, the feature of detecting
the penetration immediately before total penetration is fairly
desirable for clinical use.
The effect of the cutting angle is summarized in Fig. 13.
The round ﬂuted bur cut the work material in every direction.
Consequently, even if the work material was penetrated in
one direction, the system detected that the tool was cutting
the work material in another direction in some cases. In these
cases, the system could not properly detect the penetration.
This kind of penetration detection failure can occur when the
cutting angle is small.
Fig. 13. Cause of penetration detection failure. Even when the work
material was penetrated in one direction, the system occasionally failed to
detect this penetration if the cutting tool was still cutting the work material
in another direction.
Fig. 14. Experimental setup for hand-held experiment.
(a) (b)
Fig. 15. Results of experiment with the hand-held setup. (a) The state of the
cutting material before the experiment. (b) The state of the cutting material
after the experiment. The thickness of the processed part was approximately
0.2 mm.
B. Experiment with Hand-held Setup
1) Experimental Setup: To demonstrate the performance
of the developed system in a practical setup, we performed
an experiment. In this experiment, the bone-cutting tool was
held by a human operator instead of being ﬁxed on a table, as
shown in Fig. 14. As a work material, a plastic bone model
of a tibia (Sawbones, USA) was used.
The procedure for this experiment was as follows. First, to
acquire training data for the SVM, the operator cut the work
material as he/she liked, and the motor current and rotational
speed of the cutting tool, along with the estimated cutting
resistance, were recorded. Second, the SVM was trained
using the recorded data. Third, the operator cut the work
material with the penetration detector.
2) Experiment Results: Figure 15 shows pictures of the
work material before and after the experiment. In this ex-
periment, the developed system detected the penetration and
stopped the actuation of the cutting tool, leaving a very thin
remnant of work material. The residual thickness was about
0.2 mm. This very thin remnant of work material could
easily be broken by hand. Thus, we conclude that the system
properly detected the penetration.
3) Discussion: With the hand-held setup, the system
successfully detected the penetration of the work material
as well as in the setup in which the cutting tool was ﬁxed
on a stage. However, occasionally, the system mistakenly
detected penetration when the cutting tool had not penetrated
295
Fig. 16. Cause of false detection of penetration. When the operator took
the cutting tool off the bone, the cutting resistance also decreased, similar
to the case where the cutting tool penetrated the work material.
the work material. The developed system detected a decrease
in the cutting resistance by measuring the motor current
and rotational speed of the cutting tool. Therefore, even
if the operator took the cutting tool off the bone, the
system mistakenly detected the penetration of the bone and
stopped the actuation of the cutting tool (Fig. 16). Thus,
the motion of the cutting tool must be taken into account
to avoid this kind of false detection. The proposed system
can be easily extended to take the tool motion into account
during penetration detection, by attaching a motion sensor
to the instrument and modifying the input of the SVM. This
modiﬁcation will be investigated in future work.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We developed a hand-held bone-cutting-tool system with
autonomous penetration detection to improve the safety of
orthopedic surgery. The developed system estimates the
cutting resistance and cutting states online by using RLS and
SVM. The performance of the developed system was veriﬁed
through experiments. Thanks to the elasticity of bones,
the developed system successfully detected the penetration
immediately before total penetration in the experiments.
The experimental results showed that the accuracy of the
penetration detection was greater than 90 % in the ﬁxed
experimental setup, and the developed system successfully
detected the penetration in the hand-held setup. This study
showed that the autonomous detection of bone penetration
for a hand-held bone-cutting tool is feasible by using the
proposed scheme.
In future work, we will attach sensors (e.g., accelera-
tion sensor) to the cutting tool to measure its motion to
improve the penetration detection performance. In addition,
the proposed scheme will be extended to take into account
the motion and orientation of the cutting tool, and further
evaluations of the developed system will be conducted.
Furthermore, the proposed scheme needs to be examined
using work materials with various stiffness in future work.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Allotta, F. Belmonte, L. Bosio, and P. Dario, “Study on a mecha-
tronic tool for drilling in the osteosynthesis of long bones: Tool/bone
interaction, modeling and experiments,” Mechatronics, vol. 6, no. 4,
pp. 447 – 459, 1996.
[2] F. Ong and K. Bouazza-Marouf, “The detection of drill bit break-
through for the enhancement of safety in mechatronic assisted or-
thopaedic drilling,” Mechatronics, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 565 – 588, 1999.
[3] P.-L. Yen, Y .-J. Chu, W.-S. Huang, J.-H. Wang, and S.-S. Hung, “Bone
cutting-through detection under imageless navigation,” in Intelligent
ControlandAutomation(WCICA),20119thWorldCongresson, 2011,
pp. 1125–1129.
[4] Y . Hu, H. Jin, L. Zhang, P. Zhang, and J. Zhang, “State recognition of
pedicle drilling with force sensing in a robotic spinal surgical system,”
Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–9,
2013.
[5] N. Dioiaiti, C. Melchiorri, and S. Stramigioli, “Contact impedance es-
timation for robotic systems,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2004.
(IROS 2004). Proceedings. 2004 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, vol. 3, sept.-2 oct. 2004, pp. 2538 – 2543 vol.3.
[6] T. Yamamoto, B. Vagvolgyi, K. Balaji, L. L. Whitcomb, and A. M.
Okamura, “Tissue property estimation and graphical display for tele-
operated robot-assisted surgery,” in Robotics and Automation, 2009.
ICRA ’09. IEEE International Conference on, may 2009, pp. 4239
–4245.
[7] P. Boonvisut and M. C. Cavusoglu, “Estimation of soft tissue me-
chanical parameters from robotic manipulation data,” Mechatronics,
IEEE/ASME Transactions on, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1 –10, 2012.
[8] A. Haddadi and K. Hashtrudi-Zaad, “Real-time identiﬁcation of hunt-
crossley dynamic models of contact environments,” Robotics, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 555 –566, june 2012.
[9] K. P. Bennett and O. L. Mangasarian, “Robust linear programming
discrimination of two linearly inseparable sets,” Optimization Methods
& Software, vol. 1, pp. 23–34, 1992.
[10] C. Cortes and V . Vapnik, “Support-vector networks,” Machine Learn-
ing, vol. 20, pp. 273–297, 1995.
[11] A. Aizerman, E. M. Braverman, and L. I. Rozoner, “Theoretical
foundations of the potential function method in pattern recognition
learning,” Automation and Remote Control, vol. 25, pp. 821–837,
1964.
296
