Trajectory Learning for Human-robot Scientiﬁc Data Collection
Geoffrey A. Hollinger and Gaurav S. Sukhatme
Abstract— We propose an integrated learning and planning
framework that leverages knowledge from a human user along
with prior information about the environment to generate
trajectories for scientiﬁc data collection. The proposed frame-
work combines principles from probabilistic planning with
uncertainty modeling through nonparametric Bayesian methods
to reﬁne trajectories for execution by autonomous vehicles.
The resulting techniques allow for trajectories speciﬁed by a
user to be modiﬁed for reduced risk of collision and increased
reliability. We test our approach in the underwater ocean
monitoring domain, and we show that the proposed framework
reduces the risk of collision with ship trafﬁc by as much as
51% for an autonomous underwater vehicle operating in ocean
currents. This work provides insight into the tools necessary
for combining human-robot interaction with autonomous nav-
igation.
I. INTRODUCTION
We envision the future of scientiﬁc data collection as a
collaborative endeavor between human scientists and au-
tonomous robotic systems. High-impact examples include
autonomous underwater vehicles assisting oceanographers to
track biological phenomenon [1], aerial vehicles providing
imagery of changing ecosystems [2], and ground vehicles
monitoring volcanic activity [3]. In these example domains,
a key challenge lies in combining the expert knowledge of
the scientist with the optimization capabilities of the au-
tonomous system. The scientist brings specialized knowledge
and experience to the table, while the autonomous system
is capable of processing and evaluating large quantities of
data. Leveraging these complementary strengths requires the
development of collaborative systems capable of guiding
scientiﬁc data collection.
In this paper, we propose a learning and planning frame-
work that integrates input from humans with prior data
about the environment to reduce the risk of collision for
an autonomous vehicle. The input from the human is used
as an initial candidate trajectory of waypoints, which is
then optimized based on knowledge of disturbances in the
environment to avoid areas that have high risk of collision
with land and passing ship trafﬁc. The resulting framework
combines probabilistic planning with nonparametric learning
to improve the safety and reliability of operation. We test
G. Hollinger is with the School of Mechanical, Industrial & Manufactur-
ing Engineering, College of Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis,
OR 97331 USA, geoff.hollinger@oregonstate.edu.
G. Sukhatme is with the Department of Computer Science, Viterbi School
of Engineering, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089
USA, gaurav@usc.edu.
This research has been funded in part by the following grants: ONR
N00014-09-1-0700, ONR N00014-07-1-00738, ONR N00014-06-10043,
NSF CNS-0831728, NSF CCR-0120778, NSF CNS-1035866, and NSF IIS-
1317815.
Fig. 1: Proposed framework for human-robot collaboration to
generate safe and informative paths for autonomous vehicles
to gather scientiﬁc data.
our approach in the domain of autonomous underwater
ocean monitoring using historical data of ocean currents and
shipping activity. This domain is particularly well suited for
the testing of human-robot collaboration due to the limited
communication available underwater and the necessary su-
pervised autonomy capabilities.
The main novelty of this paper is a uniﬁed planning
and learning framework that generates reliable and safe
trajectories for autonomous vehicles based on human input.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work to combine Bayesian
learning, probabilistic path planning, and user-generated
trajectories in a uniﬁed approach. The remainder of this
paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst discuss related work
in motion panning, learning, and human-robot interaction
(Section II). We then describe the proposed human-robot
planning architecture (Section III) and trajectory reﬁnement
algorithms (Section IV). A number of data-driven simula-
tions are then presented to show the beneﬁt of the proposed
approach (Section V). Finally, we draw conclusions and
discuss avenues for future work (Section VI).
II. RELATED WORK
This paper draws on a large body of prior literature in
robotic motion planning, learning, and human-robot inter-
action. We will now discussion related work in these three
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6600
subareas and highlight the need for a uniﬁed architecture.
Motion and path planning are fundamental problems in
robotics and have been studied extensively in the past two
decades [4], [5]. Increasing the degrees of freedom of the
robot or the dimensionality of the environment typically
causes an exponential increase in the computation required to
solve the planning problem optimally. Thus, motion and path
planning problems are generally computationally hard (NP-
hard or PSPACE-hard) [6]. Modern planning methods have
focused on the generation of approximate plans with limited
computation (e.g., RRT* algorithms [7]). Our work extends
these ideas to domains where human-robot collaboration is
beneﬁcial for the generation of high-quality plans.
A key component of our work is the generation of con-
ﬁdence measures for the reliability of the robot’s trajectory.
Prior work has examined the development of such mea-
sures for various environmental processes using straightfor-
ward statistical machine learning tools [8] as well as more
sophisticated Bayesian models [9]. We propose utilizing
Gaussian Process (GP) regression [10] augmented with an
alternative measure of uncertainty based on the interpolation
variance [11] to provide conﬁdence measures on the pre-
diction of uncertainty in scientiﬁc data collection domains.
Such approaches have been used successfully to improve the
accuracy of such tasks as underwater navigation [12], [13]
and aerial vehicle surveillance [14]. However, these prior
approaches have not integrated input from humans into the
learning and planning frameworks.
Our work builds on prior work in imitation learning
that builds up cost maps from human operator example
paths [15], [16]. These prior works utilize maximum margin
planning techniques to learn cost maps from user input. Prior
work has focused on surveillance problems, where the goal is
to generate a safe path through a hazardous environment. Our
proposed framework expands on these ideas by integrating
the human scientist into the planning loop.
The problems discussed here are closely related to the
problem of adaptive sampling, which has been studied ex-
tensively in the robotics and machine learning communi-
ties [17], [18]. In adaptive sampling, the goal is to choose
observation locations that minimize prediction uncertainty or
maximizing some measure of information gain. Unlike typ-
ical adaptive sampling applications, our work also considers
probabilistic risk maps and reliability of operation. We also
integrate the preferences of the scientist at a fundamental
level to develop a uniﬁed planning architecture for human-
robot collaboration.
There is a recent thrust in environmental monitoring
towards the development of Decision Support Systems that
allow the human operator to seamlessly track the progress
of autonomous vehicles and to issue commands on the
ﬂy [19], [20], [21]. Such systems are capable of monitoring
the progress of autonomous vehicles operating in the ocean
and in other unstructured environments by providing data to
scientists in real time. Our work complements these systems
by generating suggestions for alternative paths to the humans
in addition to useful passive data.
III. HUMAN-ROBOT ARCHITECTURE
The workﬂow of the proposed architecture is as follows:
(1) a human operator speciﬁes a series of waypoints for
a vehicle to gather scientiﬁc data, (2) the waypoints are
reﬁned by the system to suggest alternative trajectories that
have lower risk of collision, and (3) the human operator
chooses the desired path. Figure 1 gives a visualization of
the proposed architecture.
The problems that we will examine consist of the follow-
ing components: a trajectory of waypoints provided by the
scientist that indirectly speciﬁes the quality of information
gathered, a “risk” map that provides the expected safety of
operating in given area, and a model of the environment
that determines how reliably the autonomous vehicle can
move between points in the environment. Figure 2 gives
an example of the necessary maps in an oceanographic
monitoring domain where an autonomous underwater vehicle
is monitoring a number of ecological hotspots (e.g., harmful
algal blooms [22]). The waypoints speciﬁed by the scientist
provide areas of high algal bloom density, the risk map
provides the probability of colliding with a ship or running
into land, and the reliability of operation is determined by the
ocean currents. We note that all of these maps are uncertain
in the sense that the quantities are not known exactly at the
time of planning. For reliable operation, it is necessary to
predict the values of the information, risk, and reliability
maps, as well as the uncertainty in those values.
Several additional examples show the broader applicability
of the delineation between information quality, risk, and
reliability maps. For instance, in the aerial surveillance
domain, the information quality represents the usefulness of
the viewing an area, the risk is the probability of collision (or
detection in a security application), and the reliability is de-
rived from the wind and vehicle dynamics. Similar examples
in ground vehicle reconnaissance are also apparent [15].
IV. TRAJECTORY REFINEMENT ALGORITHMS
We ﬁrst discuss our proposed approach for incorporating
input from a human scientist into an optimization framework.
We will build on ideas originally presented in prior work to
learn cost maps that guide autonomous ground reconnais-
sance vehicles [15]. Unlike prior work, our methods will
incorporate a measure of risk into the planning and learning
framework. We will also incorporate measures of uncertainty
into our predictions.
The formal problem is to plan a path  that is a solution
to the following optimization problem:


= argmin
2	
D(;
0
) +R(); (1)
where D(;
0
) is the deviation from the scientist’s initial
trajectory of waypoints 
0
, R() is an expected risk of
executing , 	 the space of all possible paths, and  is
a weighting parameter. We assume that we are given an
example trajectory of waypoints
0
from the human operator
and that an explicit reward function is not provided as part
of the trajectory. After approximate solutions to the above
6601
(a) Strength of ocean currents provides reliability
of operation
Shipping lanes
(b) Collision probability with shipping lanes and land
determines risk of operation
Ecological hotspots
(c) Ecological hotspots are speciﬁed with way-
points provided by the scientist
Fig. 2: Three maps that must be combined to perform efﬁcient information gathering in an ocean monitoring scenario where
an autonomous underwater vehicle is tracking a harmful algal bloom. The ocean currents affect the planned path of the
vehicle, the risk map determines the safety of operation, and the pre-speciﬁed waypoints given by the scientist provide the
usefulness of the information gathered. Our proposed system integrates these maps to improve scientiﬁc data collection.
optimization problem are found for various values of ,
the resulting trajectories are suggested to the operator for
ﬁnal selection. The operator also has the option to adjust
the values of to make the trajectories deviate more or less
from the initial plan.
There are several properties of the above problem that
make it difﬁcult to solve optimally. If the risk function is
non-convex, optimizing it will typically be NP-hard for any
rich space of paths [5]. In addition to the inherent complexity
of the path planning problem, the functions D and R may
be computationally intensive to compute. Furthermore, the
deviation and risk functions may not be known exactly in
advance (e.g., risk is only known with some certainty), and
it may become necessary to estimate their expected values
based on a distribution of possibilities. Similarly, for a given
path, it may not be certain that the vehicle can execute the
path exactly, which adds an additional level of uncertainty
to the optimization.
Successfully solving these challenges and optimizing the
vehicle’s paths requires the development of both uncertainty
modeling and planning solutions. We will now describe how
the proposed architecture addresses each of these subprob-
lems.
1) Modeling Uncertainty: A key component of our pro-
posed work is to provide a principled estimate of uncertainty
for predictions of the vehicle’s actions. These uncertainty
estimates will be incorporated through probabilistic planning
to provide the ﬁnal suggested paths for the vehicle. We
propose using non-parametric Bayesian Regression in the
form of Gaussian Processes (GPs) to provide measures of
uncertainty [10]. We will now discuss background in GPs
and also show how we can use similar ideas to develop
novel representations of uncertainty. This formulation fol-
lows closely with our prior work in uncertainty modeling
for ocean currents [12].
The disturbances at a given latitude lat, longitude lon,
and time t can be written as a tuple c(lat;lon;t) = (u;v),
whereu andv are scalar values representing components of
the disturbance vector along the cardinal axes. At a given
time T , we assume we have access to some historical data
for times t =fT  1;T  2;:::g of the disturbances. Given
this data, we want to provide predictions for the points of
time in the future as well as conﬁdence bounds for these
predictions.
A GP models a noisy process z
i
= f(x
i
) + ", where
z
i
2R,x
i
2R
d
, and" is Gaussian noise. Since the standard
GP models a one-dimensional valuez
i
, we can model the full
2D or 3D space using separate GPs or as a coupled process
(e.g., using the techniques in [23]).
We are given some data of the form D =
[(x
1
;z
1
); (x
2
;z
2
);:::; (x
n
;z
n
)], where x
i
represents a vec-
tor of latitude, longitude, and time values for a data point
i, and z
i
represents a component of the disturbance vector
at that point and time. We refer to the dn matrix of x
i
vectors as X and the vector of z
i
values as z.
To fully deﬁne a GP, we must choose a kernel function
k(x
i
;x
j
) that relates the points in X to each other. As in
our prior work, we utilize a space/time squared exponential
kernel to model correlations between the data [12]. Having
deﬁned the kernel, combining the covariance values for all
points into an n n matrix K and adding a Gaussian
observation noise hyperparameter
2
n
yieldsK
z
=K +
2
n
I.
The following equation predicts the mean function value
(e.g., a disturbance value along the predicted trajectory)
(x

) and variance V
gp
(x

) at a selected point x

given
the historical and prediction training data:
(x

) =k
T

(K +
2
n
I)
 1
z; (2)
V
gp
(x

) =k(x

;x

) k
T

(K +
2
n
I)
 1
k

; (3)
wherek

is the covariance vector between the selected point
x

and the training inputs X. This model gives a mean and
variance for a particular latitude, longitude, and future time.
The Gaussian Process variance described above gives an
estimate of the uncertainty of a prediction based on the data
sparsity around that point and the estimated hyperparameters.
6602
While the GP variance provides some useful insight into
the uncertainty in predictions, it has been shown in prior
work that it fails to correlate with the error in complex
disturbances (e.g., ocean currents). To provide a more in-
formed uncertainty measure, we utilize a method based on
the interpolation variance [14], [24]. Once a GP has been
learned, the interpolation variance can be estimated as:
V
iv
(x

) =k
T

(K +
2
n
I)
 1
(z (x

))
T
(z (x

)): (4)
This measure of variance provides a richer representation
that accounts for both data sparsity and data variability
and has been shown to provide improved prediction for the
trajectories of autonomous underwater vehicles [12].
2) Probabilistic Planning: The learned uncertainty pre-
dictions described above can be incorporated into probabilis-
tic path planners to reﬁne trajectories provided by humans.
We propose utilizing Monte Carlo Sampling methods to
estimate the risk of a trajectory given an estimate of the
disturbances and the uncertainty in those estimates. The
planner assumes that the stochasticity in the predictions uses
the spatio-temporal variance estimates from the Gaussian
Process (either the GP variance or the interpolation variance).
These variances are used to generate a distribution of sur-
facing locations from a set of prior trials (or simulations).
This distribution of surfacing locations is used to generate a
transition functionT (s
0
js;a), which describes the probability
of moving to states
0
given we choose to take actiona from
state s.
The proposed planner uses the transition function de-
scribed above to evaluate a number of candidate plans. The
costs of the plans are given by a weighting of the risk
obtained from the risk map and the deviation from the
operator’s initial trajectory of waypoints 
0
as described
in Equation 1. The proposed planner sequentially examines
each waypoint provided by the operator and checks all pos-
sible alternative waypoints. The cost valuesC are calculated
for each possible action a that could be taken from initial
waypoint s using the following rule:
C(s;a) 
X
s
0
T (s
0
js;a)(D(s
0
;
0
) +R(s
0
)); (5)
where D(s
0
;
0
) is the deviation caused by adding state s
0
to the trajectory and R(s
0
) is the risk caused by adding
state s
0
to the trajectory. In the domains of interest, the
actions in the above equation represent target waypoints
(note that the actual waypoint reached will be different from
the target waypoint due to the modeled disturbances). We
discretize the possible target waypoints in the environment
and then select the action with the lowest expected cost value.
This process is then repeated for the next waypoint until the
entire trajectory has been modiﬁed.
Given the appropriate uncertainty measures and the plan-
ning methods described above, we now have a framework
to modify waypoints provided by the user. We would expect
the transition models and risk maps to provide improvements
in the reliability and safety of the resulting plan. The data-
driven simulations in the following section will conﬁrm this
trend.
V. DATA-DRIVEN SIMULATIONS
We now present a validation of the proposed framework in
the underwater monitoring domain in the Southern Califor-
nia Bight region where an autonomous underwater vehicle
(AUV) is monitoring an oceanographic phenomenon with
the help of a scientist. The simulations model a Slocum
Glider [25], which is a buoyancy-controlled AUV that moves
at a speed of approximately 0.3m=s. The scientist provides
the glider with a series of waypoints, and the vehicle dives
between the waypoints while using dead reckoning to deter-
mine when to surface. Due to its slow speed, the glider is
highly susceptible to ocean currents, and it is often difﬁcult
to predict where exactly the glider will surface relative to
the speciﬁed waypoint. The glider is in danger of running
aground if it comes too close to land, and in addition, if the
glider surfaces within a shipping lane, it becomes susceptible
to collision with passing boat trafﬁc.
The goal of these simulations is to determine the extent
to which we can improve the safety of operation using the
proposed learning and planning methods. In this domain,
safety is measured by the probability of the underwater
vehicle successfully completing its mission without coming
too close to land or encountering a passing ship. The scientist
provides the initial series of waypoints, and the proposed
framework is then used to modify these waypoints to de-
crease the probability of collision while also minimizing the
necessary deviation from the initial plan.
The simulations were performed on a single desktop PC
with a 3.2 GHz Intel i7 processor and 9 GB of RAM.
The simulations incorporate data from ocean currents pro-
vided the by the JPL Regional Ocean Modeling Systems
(ROMs) [26]. The JPL ROMs system provides estimates of
the ocean currents but not uncertainty in those estimates.
The uncertainty in the ocean currents was determined using
the interpolation variance as discussed in Section IV. The
uncertainty learning portion of the proposed method took
approximately 5 minutes to complete, and the planning
portion completed in less than a second using a 40 40
discretized grid of possible waypoint locations. We note that
the learning portion only needs to be run once per day, and
many trajectories can then be reﬁned using those uncertainty
estimates.
Risk maps were generated for the simulation using histor-
ical Automatic Identiﬁcation Systems (AIS) shipping data.
AIS is a tracking system that mandates a large number of
vessels in the United States (and other countries) to broadcast
their locations information via VHF transceivers (see [25]
for more details). We used historical AIS data collected
over a period of ﬁve months (between January and May,
2010) in the region 33.25 degrees N to 34.13 degrees N and
117.7 degrees W and 118.8 degrees W. Using this data, we
calculated an aggregate risk value at all possible discretized
6603
Longitude
Latitude
 
 
?118.8 ?118.6 ?118.4 ?118.2 ?118 ?117.8
33.8
33.7
33.6
33.5
33.4
33.3
33.2
33.1
33.0
User input waypoints
Refined waypoints
Start
(a) Initial and reﬁned waypoints overlaid on risk
map. Lighter areas have higher risk of collision
with land or passing ships.
Longitude
Latitude
 
 
?118.8 ?118.6 ?118.4 ?118.2 ?118 ?117.8
33.8
33.7
33.6
33.5
33.4
33.3
33.2
33.1
33.0
User input waypoints
Refined waypoints
Start
(b) Initial and reﬁned waypoints overlaid on ocean
current uncertainty map. Redder areas denote
higher areas of normalized uncertainty.
Longitude
Latitude
 
 
?118.8 ?118.6 ?118.4 ?118.2 ?118 ?117.8
33.8
33.7
33.6
33.5
33.4
33.3
33.2
33.1
33.0
User input waypoints
Refined waypoints
Start
(c) Initial and ﬁnal trajectory overlaid on ocean
current predictions. Vectors denote direction and
magnitude of ocean currents.
Fig. 3: Example of improving the initial trajectory of waypoints provided by a scientist using the proposed learning and
planning framework for data from April 24, 2013. The reﬁned path avoids the riskier (lighter) areas and also remains in
areas where the uncertainty of the ocean currents is low. The resulting path is safer and more reliable without deviating
much from the initial waypoints given by the scientist.
waypoints in the region, which correlates with the chance of
hitting a passing ship.
Figure 3 shows an example of how an initial trajectory was
modiﬁed to reduce risk in the ocean monitoring domain, and
Figure 4 gives a visualization of how changing the weighting
value () affects the resulting trajectories. In this example,
the human operator chooses to move the AUV into a risky
harbor region to gather data. The algorithm then modiﬁes
this trajectory to preserve the intent of gathering data in
the harbor while also avoiding the high-risk shipping lanes
and the most dangerous areas of the harbor. We also see
that the estimates of the ocean currents are more certain in
the areas traversed by the modiﬁed trajectories. Effectively
combining these two types of information would require an
expert operator capable of processing data in real-time. With
the proposed system, the operator can choose the desired
trajectory without any underlying knowledge of the risk
and then have the system reﬁne it for increased safety and
reliability.
Finally, we provide quantitative evaluations of the devia-
tion and risk tradeoff between a high ( = 1000) and low
( = 100) value of the weighting parameter. In Figure 5,
we see that the proposed methods provides trajectories that
range from closely tracking the initial trajectory with high
risk to loosely following the initial trajectory with lower risk.
In some cases we are able to achieve up to a 51% reduction
in risk while deviating from the path by less than 0.8 km.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The results in this paper have shown that it is possible
to combine waypoints provided by a human operator with
historical data to improve the operation of autonomous
vehicles in scientiﬁc monitoring scenarios. We have pro-
posed Bayesian learning techniques that allow for uncertainty
in predictions to be incorporated into the ﬁnal trajectory,
and we have integrated these uncertainty estimates into a
probabilistic planning framework. The resulting framework
allows for reduced risk of collision for an autonomous
Longitude
Latitude
 
 
?118.8 ?118.6 ?118.4 ?118.2 ?118 ?117.8
33.8
33.7
33.6
33.5
33.4
33.3
33.2
33.1
33.0
User input waypoints
Refined waypoints (low risk)
Refined waypoints (medium risk)
Refined waypoints (high risk)
Start
Fig. 4: Initial trajectory and set of suggested trajectories us-
ing different weightings between deviation and risk. Higher
weighting of risk leads to safer paths at the cost of deviating
from the initially speciﬁed trajectory.
glider performing an ocean monitoring task with input from
a human operator. By integrating feedback from the user
into an algorithmic planning framework, we have effectively
improved the safety and reliability of autonomous vehicle
operation.
This paper opens up a number of avenues for future
work at the intersection of human-robot interaction and
autonomous path planning. One promising avenue is the
development of lifelong learning approaches that allow tra-
jectories speciﬁed by the human operator to be stored to
improve trajectory generation for future plans. In addition, it
may be beneﬁcial to change the ordering of the waypoints
to improve the safety of the trajectory. The incorporation
of re-ordering into our framework is fairly straightforward;
however, it would require additional metrics to determine
the deviation penalty from the scientist’s original path. Ulti-
6604
2 3 4 5 6
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
Number of waypoints
Total Deviation (km)
 
 
Initial path
Refined path: high alpha
Refined path: low alpha
2 3 4 5 6
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
Number of waypoints
Risk (chance of collision)
 
 
Initial path
Refined path: high alpha
Refined path: low alpha
Fig. 5: Deviation and risk for varying weighting parameters for trials using data from April 24, 2013. The proposed method
allows the scientist to trade off between the initially selected waypoints and safer paths that deviate from them. Each data
point is averaged over 20 user-input trajectories, and error bars are one SEM.
mately, we believe that techniques like the one proposed here
will improve the efﬁciency of scientiﬁc data collection and
allow us to gather data about phenomena that were previously
outside the reach of scientiﬁc investigation.
REFERENCES
[1] R. N. Smith, J. Das, H. K. Heidarsson, A. A. Pereira, F. Arrichiello,
I. Cetinic, L. Darjany, M.-E. Garneau, M.-D. Howard, C. Oberg,
M. Ragan, E. Seubert, E. C. Smith, B. Stauffer, A. Schnetzer, G. Toro-
Farmer, D. A. Caron, B. H. Jones, and G. S. Sukhatme, “USC CINAPS
builds bridges: Observing and monitoring the Southern California
Bight,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationMag., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 20–30,
Mar 2010.
[2] M. Bryson, A. Reid, F. Ramos, and S. Sukkarieh, “Airborne vision-
based mapping and classiﬁcation of large farmland environments,” J.
Field Robotics, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 632–655, 2010.
[3] S. L. Nooner and W. W. Chadwick Jr., “V olcanic inﬂation measured
in the caldera of axial seamount: Implications for magma supply
and future eruptions,” Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, vol. 10,
no. 2, 2009.
[4] J. C. Latombe, Robot Motion Planning. Boston, MA: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, 1991.
[5] S. M. LaValle, Planning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge
University Press, 2006, also available at http://planning.cs.uiuc.edu/.
[6] J. H. Reif, “Complexity of the mover’s problem and generalizations,”
in Proc. IEEE Symp. Foundations of Computer Science, 1979, pp.
421–427.
[7] S. Karaman and E. Frazzoli, “Sampling-based algorithms for optimal
motion planning,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 30, no. 7, pp. 846–
894, 2011.
[8] C. J. Willmott, R. E. Davis, J. J. Feddema, K. M. Klink, D. R.
Legates, C. M. Rowe, S. G. Ackleson, and J. O’Donnell, “Statistics for
the evaluation and comparison of models,” J. Geophysical Research,
vol. 90, no. C12, pp. 8995–9005, 1985.
[9] P. F. Lermusiaux, “Uncertainty estimation and prediction for interdis-
ciplinary ocean dynamics,” J. Computational Physics, vol. 217, pp.
176–199, 2006.
[10] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for
Machine Learning. The MIT Press, 2006.
[11] J. Yamamoto, “An alternative measure of the reliability of ordinary
kriging estimates,” Mathematical Geology, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 489–
509, 2000.
[12] G. Hollinger, A. Pereira, and G. S. Sukhatme, “Learning uncertainty
models for reliable operation of autonomous underwater vehicles,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, 2013, pp. 5573–5579.
[13] G. Hollinger, B. Englot, F. Hover, U. Mitra, and G. Sukhatme, “Active
planning for underwater inspection and the beneﬁt of adaptivity,” Int.
J. Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 3–18, 2013.
[14] Y .-H. Kim, D. Shell, C. Ho, and S. Saripalli, “Spatial interpolation for
robotic sampling: Uncertainty with two models of variance,” in Proc.
Int. Symp. Experimental Robotics, 2012.
[15] N. Ratliff, D. Silver, and J. A. Bagnell, “Learning to search: Func-
tional gradient techniques for imitation learning,” Autonomous Robots,
vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 25–53, July 2009.
[16] D. Silver, J. A. Bagnell, and A. Stentz, “Learning from demonstration
for autonomous navigation in complex unstructured terrain,” Int. J.
Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 1565–1592, 2010.
[17] K. H. Low, J. M. Dolan, and P. Khosla, “Information-theoretic
approach to efﬁcient adaptive path planning for mobile robotic en-
vironmental sensing,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Automated Planning and
Scheduling, 2009, pp. 233–240.
[18] D. R. Thompson, S. Chien, Y . Chao, P. P. Li, B. Cahill, J. Levin,
O. Schoﬁeld, A. Balasuriya, S. Petillo, M. Arrott, and M. Meisinger,
“Spatiotemporal path planning in strong, dynamic, uncertain currents,”
in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, 2010.
[19] J. Das, T. Maughan, M. McCann, M. Godin, T. O’Reilly, M. Messie,
F. Bahr, K. Gomes, F. Py, J. Bellingham, G. Sukhatme, and K. Ra-
jan, “Towards mixed-initiative, multi-robot ﬁeld experiments: Design,
deployment, and lessons learned,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2011.
[20] P. Li, Y . Chao, Q. Vu, Z. Li, J. Farrara, H. Zhang, and X. Wang,
“OurOcean - an integrated solution to ocean monitoring and forecast-
ing,” in Proc. Oceans MTS/IEEE Conf., Boston, MA, 2006.
[21] J. Sattar and G. Dudek, “Towards quantitative modeling of task con-
ﬁrmations in human-robot dialog,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics
and Automation, May 2011, pp. 1957–1963.
[22] J. Das, K. Rajan, S. Frolov, J. Ryan, F. Py, D. A. Caron, and
G. S. Sukhatme, “Towards marine bloom trajectory prediction for auv
mission planning,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation,
2010.
[23] M. A.
´
Alvarez and N. D. Lawrence, “Computationally efﬁcient
convolved multiple output gaussian processes,” J. Machine Learning
Research, vol. 12, pp. 1425–1466, 2011.
[24] J. Yamamoto and M. M. da Rocha, “Properties and applications of the
interpolation variance associated with ordinary kriging estimates,” in
Proc. Int. Symp. Spatial Accuracy Assessment in Natural Resources
and Environmental Sciences, 2008, pp. 70–77.
[25] A. Pereira, J. Binney, G. Hollinger, and G. Sukhatme, “Risk-aware
path planning for autonomous underwater vehicles using predictive
ocean models,” J. Field Robotics, vol. 30, no. 5, pp. 741–762, Sept.
2013.
[26] A. F. Shchepetkin and J. C. McWilliams, “The Regional Oceanic
Modeling System (ROMS): a split-explicit, free-surface, topography-
following-coordinate oceanic model,” Ocean Modelling, vol. 9, no. 4,
pp. 347–404, 2005.
6605
