  
? 
Abstract— Biomedical applications of micro or nanorobots 
require active movement through complex biological fluids. 
These are generally non-Newtonian (viscoelastic) fluids that are 
characterized by complicated networks of macromolecules that 
have size-dependent rheological properties. It has been 
suggested that an untethered microrobot could assist in retinal 
surgical procedures. To do this it must navigate the vitreous 
humor, a hydrated double network of collagen fibrils and high 
molecular-weight, polyanionic hyaluronan macromolecules. 
Here, we examine the characteristic size that potential robots 
must have to traverse vitreous relatively unhindered. We have 
constructed magnetic tweezers that provide a large gradient of 
up to 320 T/m to pull sub-micron paramagnetic beads through 
biological fluids. A novel two-step electrical discharge machining 
(EDM) approach is used to construct the tips of the magnetic 
tweezers with a resolution of 30 µm and high aspect ratio of 
~17:1 that restricts the magnetic field gradient to the plane of 
observation. We report measurements on porcine vitreous. In 
agreement with structural data and passive Brownian diffusion 
studies we find that the unhindered active propulsion through 
the eye calls for nanorobots with cross-sections of less than 500 
nm. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The human body contains a variety of complex biological 
fluids. They are often non-Newtonian fluids with viscoelastic 
properties, [1] e.g. mucus, sputum, vitreous humor of the eye, 
etc. Many of them, e.g. blood, saliva, and synovial fluid in the 
joints, exhibit shear thinning behavior. Understanding the 
local rheology is necessary if micro and nanorobots are to 
navigate these complex fluids. A number of micro-robots have 
been realized that swim in Newtonian fluids [2-5], but the 
movement in a non-Newtonian fluid poses extra challenges. 
There is a need to understand the local rheology of these 
biologically and medically important fluids down to the 
nanoscale in order to optimize the design of nanorobots and 
artificial micro-swimmers.  
In microrheology, colloidal particles are directly 
embedded in the fluid, which permits its rheological 
characterization at small length scales. [6] This approach has 
several advantages over traditional rheological measurements. 
 
* This work was supported by the Max Planck Society and the European 
Research Council under the ERC Grant agreement Chiral MicroBots 
(278213). 
T. Qiu,
 
D. Schamel, A. G. Mark and P. Fischer
 
are with Max Planck 
Institute for Intelligent Systems, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany (corresponding 
author: P. Fischer;
 
+49 711 689-3560; e-mail: fischer@is.mpg.de).  
T. Qiu is also with Institute of Bioengineering, Ecole Polytechnique 
Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. 
D. Schamel and P. Fischer
 
are also with the Institut für Physikalische 
Chemie, Universität Stuttgart, Pfaffenwaldring 55, 70569 Stuttgart, 
Germany. 
Only small sample volumes down to microliters are required 
[7]. Secondly, due to small size of the probe, microrheology is 
able to provide local information in inhomogeneous media. In 
passive microrheology, the random movements of colloidal 
probes by thermal excitation are measured to very high 
frequencies, far beyond those possible in macroscopic 
rheometry; while in active microrheology the interaction of 
micro probes with the microstructure is directly measured and 
local material heterogeneities can be analyzed [6]. Last but not 
least, micro probes can be injected into real biological tissues, 
even in vivo. This is extremely important for biomedical 
samples, for which the fluidic properties may change 
dramatically due to degradation, liquidation etc. after removal 
to an ex situ environment. 
Active microrheology probes have been actuated by 
different approaches, including optical tweezers, magnetic 
tweezers and atomic force microscopes (AFM).[8] Among 
these, magnetic tweezers [9-12] exert the largest force on the 
probe. In previous work, different geometries have been 
proposed for magnetic tweezers, depending on the number of 
magnetic poles. [13, 14] Key in all setups is the number, shape 
and size of the magnetic pole tips. These should be very thin in 
the horizontal direction in order to realize a high gradient, but 
stay in well-defined relative positions. Pole tips are generally 
made by electroplating [13], pulsed electrodeposition 
followed by photolithography[15] or laser cutting [14]. The 
drawback with these approaches is that they cannot fabricate 
large heights of the magnetic layer (the largest height is 
normally smaller than 10 µm by deposition or plating and 
smaller than 200 µm by laser cutting), which may lead to an 
inhomogeneous magnetic field orthogonal to the viewing 
direction (Z-height in a microscope). Any unwanted 
Z-component of the gradient will drag the magnetic beads out 
of the focus plane of the microscope and severely limit the 
accuracy of the microrheological measurements. Another 
disadvantage of electroplating or vapor deposition processes 
is the difficulty in exercising the stoichometric control 
necessary for advanced magnetic alloys. 
Here, we describe a three-pole magnetic tweezer whose 
tips are fabricated by electrical discharge machining (EDM). 
The EDM method can process tips with deep sections (500 
µm thickness or more), high spatial resolution (30 µm) with 
high aspect ratio (thickness vs. tip apex diameter ~17:1). The 
three tips produce a large and homogeneous magnetic field 
gradient. The gradient is characterized by applying Stokes law 
to magnetic beads dragged through a Newtonian fluid. We 
apply this instrument to measure the rheological properties, 
under active manipulation, of vitreous humor, a target medium 
for biomedical robots. The measurements show that the mesh 
of the polymer network found in the vitreous impedes the 
Active Microrheology of the Vitreous of the Eye applied to 
Nanorobot Propulsion* 
Tian Qiu, Debora Schamel, Andrew G. Mark, and Peer Fischer, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3801
  
passage of particles greater than 500 nm in diameter. This 
establishes an important size constraint for nanorobots 
intended to operate freely within the eye. 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Materials and sample preparation 
Four kinds of paramagnetic beads were used. 0.5 µm, 1.0 
µm and 1.89 µm diameter magnetic beads (PMSi-CH.5-5, 
PMSi-CH1.0-5, PMC-1.5, respectively, all with carboxyl 
functional groups, 25 mg/mL) were obtained from Kisker 
Biotech. Larger 2.7 µm diameter magnetic beads (Dynabeads 
M-270, Amine functional group, 2x10
9
 beads/mL) were 
obtained from Invitrogen. 
500 µL of glycerol (99.5%, VWR), used as received, was 
mixed thoroughly with 5 µL of 0.5 or 1.0 µm diameter beads 
with quantum dot coupling, or 1 µL of 1.89 µm diameter 
beads without quantum dot coupling. 
Porcine eyes were kept on ice and experiments were 
carried out within 6 h of harvesting. The vitreous from the eye 
was dissected with a scalpel. The dissected ~1 mm3 parts were 
randomly selected for the microrheology study, and injected 
with 2 µL of beads (with diameters of, respectively, 0.5 µm, 
1.0 µm and 2.7 µm). 
B. Quantum dot coupling to the magnetic beads 
250 µL of carboxyl-functionalized superparamagnetic 
silica particles (0.5 and 1 µm diameter) were mixed with 750 
µL MES-buffer pH 6.5 (final concentration 20 mM). 2 mg of 
1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodiimid (EDC; 
Sigma Aldrich) and 1 mg of N-Hydroxysuccinimid (NHS; 
Sigma Aldrich) were added and the mixture was stirred for 2 h 
at 4 °C. The particles were washed twice with MES-buffer by 
centrifugation and resuspension, and dispersed in 0.5 mL 
MES-buffer (pH 6.5, 20 mM) containing 2 µL of 
amino-functionalized eFluor 650NC (eBioscience). The 
solution was stirred over night at 4 °C and washed 3 times with 
water by centrifugation. 
C. Magnetic tweezers apparatus 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the magnetic tweezers apparatus 
uses a 3-pole geometry to achieve 2D control of the 
micro-probes in the plane of the tips. Three independently 
driven coils control the magnetic field in each tip. Each coil is 
made of 2200 turns of 0.5 mm diameter copper wire around a 
steel spool (St 37-2). A thermocouple embedded in the middle 
of each coil monitors its temperature (Fig. 1(B)). 
The three pole tips are the key elements of the apparatus. 
From the outer circumference of the apparatus where they 
connect to the coils, each pole tip tapers to a fine apex. The 
three tips, arranged at 120°, point inwards towards the 
working volume. To achieve high gradients the apices need to 
be closely spaced, and in order to maintain a symmetric field 
within the working volume requires high spatial precision, and 
long-term stability. However, efficient control of the magnetic 
flux requires that each tip is isolated from the others by areas 
of high magnetic reluctance. These requirements – separated 
micro-sized tips keeping precise relative positions at 
micro-scale range – place stringent demands on the 
manufacturing process. 
A novel 2-step EDM approach was used to achieve the 
manufacturing requirements of the tips. The process is shown 
in detail in Fig. 2. First, a 500 µm thick steel plate (St37-2) 
was cut by wire EDM. The final arrangement of the three tip 
apices is established in this step. They remain temporarily 
connected by a ring around the outer circumference that fixes 
their relative positions, as shown in Fig. 2(A). The EDM wire 
diameter determines the minimum apex spacing, shown in Fig. 
1(C). We have achieved spacings as small as 220 µm, with tip 
diameters smaller than 30 µm. EDM is appropriate for cutting 
any conductive material, including pure metals or alloys, it 
can cut thick sheets, and the technique is quick and cost 
effective. 
In the second step (Fig. 2(B)), screws are used to mount 
the steel plate to an aluminum frame. The three tips are further 
secured with an epoxy stabilizing ring (green) that is cast to 
shape in a PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) mold. The central 
hole in the ring leaves the three tip apecies exposed and allows 
access to the working volume. Its diameter can be varied from 
300 µm to several mm for different applications. 
Next, a second EDM cut removes the sacrificial ring 
joining the three tips. This step eliminates the unwanted low 
reluctance path between the tips (Fig. 2(C)). During this 
operation, the epoxy and screws fix the tips and prevent 
relative motion between them. Comparing the SEM pictures 
before (Fig. 3(A) corresponding to Fig. 2(B)) and after (Fig. 
3(B) corresponding to Fig. 2(C)) the second EDM cut, no 
significant changes of positions or shapes are observed. 
Finally, the three drive coils and a steel pole piece are 
assembled above the tips (Fig. 3(D)). 
 
Figure 1.  Magnetic tweezers apparatus. (A) 3D design model of the 
apparatus. (B) picture of the assembled apparatus on the microscope stage. 
(C) Enlarged picture of the three pole tips. Calculated magnetic field flux 
density is shown by color map. (D) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) 
image of the three pole tips at a viewing angle of 10 degrees. 
 
3802
  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Manufacturing process of the apparatus. (A) First EDM cut of the 
steel plate. (B) Steel plate mounted to the aluminum holder. Epoxy is cured in 
the central area but leaving the three tips exposed. (C) Second cut of the steel 
plate. (D) Assembly of the apparatus. The numbers represent 1- steel plate 
after first EDM cut, 1’- steel plate after second EDM cut, 2- aluminum frame, 
3- epoxy, 4- coil, 5- top pole piece. 
 
Figure 3.  SEM images of the three pole tips before (A) and after (B) the 
second EDM cut show no changes in position or shape. 
D. Magnetic field simulation 
A 3D model of the apparatus was created in Inventor 2012 
(Autodesk Inc.) and the magnetic performance was simulated 
in Comsol 4.3 (Comsol Multiphysics). Because the feature 
sizes of the tips (30 µm) and coils (30 mm) differ by three 
orders of magnitude, the model was simulated in two separate 
parts: the coil and the three tips. This allowed finer resolution 
of the mesh at the pole tips, without requiring micron scale 
mesh sizes over the entire apparatus volume. The magnetic 
flux generated by the coil in the large-scale calculation was 
applied as a magnetization to the tips in the small scale model. 
In this manner the magnetic field in the working volume 
between the three tips was simulated. 
E. Magnetic gradient calibration 
We used measurements of magnetic particle velocity in a 
Newtonian fluid to calibrate the magnetic gradient using 
Stokes law. The fluid drag F of a sphere moving at low 
Reynolds number is: 
? = 6π? R? 
                                 (1) 
where ? is the viscosity of the fluid, R is the radius of the 
sphere, and v is the velocity of the sphere. 
The magnetic force F on an object whose magnetic 
moment M is aligned with the magnetic field is 
? = M ·?B 
                                 (2) 
where B is the magnitude of the magnetic field. For a 
homogeneous particle, the magnetic moment is 
? =? ci
V 
                                 (3) 
For the magnetic beads used here 
? ci
= 3.5 ? 10
5
 ? /? 
[16]. V is the volume of the object, 
which in this case 
V =
4
3
πR
3
 
                                 (4) 
With known properties of the magnetic beads, we measure 
the velocity of the beads v to calculate the gradient of the field  
?B 
 from equations (1) and (4): 
?B =
9? ? 2? 2
? ?? 
                                 (5) 
Furthermore, it can be seen that for a given gradient, the 
relationship between the beads’ velocity v and diameter d is 
quadratic: 
? =
? ???B
18? ? 2
 
                                 (6) 
F. Microrheology measurement 
Prepared fluid was added to the sample hole among the 
three tips where it was held by surface tension. A DC current 
generated by a programmable amplifier was applied to one 
coil, while the other two coils remained inactivate. The 
movement of the magnetic probes was observed by an 
inverted microscope under 50x objective (NA=0.55, Zeiss). 
For beads smaller than 1 µm, 650 nm fluorescence was 
detected (an additional long pass filter 605 nm before the 
CCD to filter the fluorescence of the epoxy stabilizing ring); 
for beads larger than 1 µm bright field was used. The video 
was recorded at 5 frames/s, particle velocities were analyzed 
in ImageJ (NIH), and the trajectories were drawn by the 
Mosaic plugin [17]. 
In glycerol, 3 sizes of beads, 0.5, 1.0, 1.89 µm, were tested 
at a constant current of 0.25 A. For 1.0 µm beads, four 
different currents, 0.25, 0.5, 1.0, 2.0 A were applied. In 
porcine vitreous, three sizes of beads, 0.5, 1.0, 2.7 µm, were 
tested at a constant current of 0.5 A. 
3803
  
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A.  Simulation results 
The results of the simulations of the magnetic flux density 
on the center plane of the tips, with 2.0 A excitation current, 
are shown in Fig. 4(A) and (B). The strength and gradient 
along the three principal axes running through the center point 
are shown in Fig. 4(C). The magnetic flux density increases 
dramatically from 0.1 T to 1.0 T within the 300 µm gap. The 
highest gradient is achieved very near the tips, however this 
area is not useful for microrheology, because the gradient 
there is non-uniform (i.e. the second derivative of the field 
strength is non-negligible) and particles will also be easily 
attracted to and trapped by the tip. In contrast, inside the 
working volume, 50 µm from the center point, the field 
gradient in the x-direction is almost constant at ~1 kT/m, ideal 
for microrheology experiments. Furthermore, the gradients in 
the y and z directions are negligible. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Comsol simulation results of the magnetic field. (A) Magnetic 
flux density. (B) Enlarged picture of the central tip area (shown as red box in 
A). x and y directions are shown by arrows. (C) The magnetic flux density 
and gradient along the center line (shown as red dashed line in B). 
B. Magnetic gradient calibration 
To measure the magnetic gradient, we used different beads 
in glycerol of known viscosity. All experiments were 
conducted with a constant current of 0.25 A. As shown in Fig. 
5(A), the velocity of beads increases quadratically with 
diameter, in accord with equation (6). Since the magnetic 
force rises with the cube of bead's diameter, while the fluidic 
drag increases only linearly, in a Newtonian fluid larger 
particles move faster. However, as we shall see, this may not 
be true if the fluid is non-Newtonian, especially if it contains 
complicated networks e.g. a biopolymer network. 
The gradient's response to coil current was tested with 1.0 
µm beads. As expected, the bead velocity, and hence the field 
gradient driving them, rises linearly with the current (Fig 
5(B)). The measured gradient at 2.0 A current is 320±74 T/m. 
This is about 3 times smaller than the simulation result. The 
discrepancy arises because the simulation was conducted on 
separate coil and tip models matched by the flux injected into 
the tip. This likely overestimates the magnetization of the tip. 
Secondly, at this field the steel tips have already reached 
saturation near their apices. The saturation flux density of 
St37-2 steel is about 1.5 T,[18] smaller than the largest flux 
density found in the simulation. The gradient could be further 
improved by using a material with a higher saturation 
magnetization. For example oriented silicon iron saturates at 
2.0 T [19] and would therefore provide a maximum gradient 
1.3 times higher than the current material.  
 
 
Figure 5. Magnetic gradient characterization in glycerol. (A) Beads’ average 
velocity increases quadratically with diameter at fixed coil current 0.25 A. 
The dashed line is the quadratic fit of the data. (B) Beads’ average velocity 
increases linearly with coil current at fixed bead diameter 1.0 µm. Magnetic 
gradient strengths are calculated based on Eqn. (5).  
3804
  
 
 
Figure 6. 500 nm diameter magnetic beads in porcine vitreous and the 
corresponding tracking trajectories. (A) Fluorescent image taken under 
microscope. (B) Tracking trajectories of the beads along gradient towards top 
right corner.  See also supplementary movie S1. 
 
Figure 7. Average velocities of different diameter beads in the porcine 
vitreous (t-test * P<0.001, ** P>0.05). 
C. Active microrheology measurements of vitreous 
Fig. 6(A) shows the fluorescent image of 500 nm diameter 
magnetic beads in porcine vitreous.  As the trajectories in Fig. 
6(B) and supplementary movie S1 show, the beads are 
actively pulled by the magnetic gradient through the vitreous. 
The average linear velocity was 0.48±0.12 µm/s for a gradient 
of ~80 T/m. This indicates that the porcine vitreous has an 
apparent viscosity of 0.8 Pa•s to 500nm beads according to 
equation (5). 
However, 1.0 µm beads under the same gradient moved at 
a velocity of 0.11±0.06 µm/s, significantly lower than the 500 
nm ones (P<0.001 for t-test). Similarly, 2.7 µm beads for the 
same gradient (0.06±0.06 µm/s) were almost immobile, which 
shows no significant difference with 1.0 µm beads (P>0.05 for 
t-test). In contrast, for a Newtonian fluid one would expect 
that the velocity of beads should increase quadratically with 
the bead diameter (shown in Fig. 5(A)). The reason is the 
underlying complexity of the  vitreous which is composed of a 
polymer network of collagen type II fibrils and high 
molecular-weight, polyanionic hyaluronan macromolecules 
[20]. It follows that if the particle diameter is smaller than the 
mesh size, it can easily be pulled through the vitreous. 
A previous study of passive Brownian diffusion and 
structural data shows that the mesh size of bovine vitreous is 
~550±50 nm, and polystyrene nanoparticles coated with 
–COOH in the size range of 100-200 nm readily diffused 
through the mesh.[21] Our data agrees with this result, 
moreover, we find that 500 nm –COOH coated nanoparticles 
can be actively pulled through the polymer network. In this 
paper high magnetic gradients were used to achieve active 
pulling of the nanoparticles. It will be of interest to determine 
the smallest practical gradients that can be used to pull 
nanoparticles through the vitreous, and in particular if such a 
scheme can be realized in vivo. Active actuation of the 
nanoparticles provides more potential for targeted drug 
delivery to specific region. Moreover, finding the largest 
possible size that can actively pass through the polymer 
network provides useful information for the design of 
untethered nanorobots moving through complex biological 
tissues. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
In this work, we report a novel two-step EDM approach to 
manufacture magnetic tweezer tips at high horizontal 
resolution (30 µm) and high aspect ratio (~17:1). This is a fast 
and cost-effective method to construct high gradient magnetic 
tweezers (320 T/m) with a homogeneous direction that 
restricts the gradient to the plane of observation. This system 
was utilized to study the microrhelogy of porcine vitreous. We 
discovered that unhindered active propulsion through the eye 
calls for nanorobots with cross-sections of less than 500 nm. 
This system has the potential to be a reliable and easy-to-use 
method to study the microrheolgy of biological fluids and 
provide useful information on the design of artificial 
self-propelling and untethered micro-robots in complex 
biofluids. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. C. Fung, "Bio-viscoelastic Fluids," in Biomechanics, 1981, pp. 
174-195. 
[2] A. Ghosh and P. Fischer, "Controlled Propulsion of Artificial Magnetic 
Nanostructured Propellers," Nano Letters, vol. 9, pp. 2243-2245, Jun 
2009. 
[3] D. Schamel, et al., "Chiral Colloidal Molecules And Observation of 
The Propeller Effect," Journal of the American Chemical Society, doi: 
10.1021/ja405705x, 2013. 
[4] L. Zhang, et al., "Artificial bacterial flagella: Fabrication and magnetic 
control," Applied Physics Letters, vol. 94, p. 064107, Feb 2009. 
[5] S. Tottori, et al., "Magnetic Helical Micromachines: Fabrication, 
Controlled Swimming, and Cargo Transport," Advanced Materials, 
vol. 24, pp. 811-816, Feb 2012. 
[6] T. M. Squires and T. G. Mason, "Fluid Mechanics of Microrheology," 
Annual Review of Fluid Mechanics, vol. 42, pp. 413-438, 2010. 
3805
  
[7] D. Weihs, et al., "Bio-microrheology: A frontier in microrheology," 
Biophysical Journal, vol. 91, pp. 4296-4305, Dec 2006. 
[8] K. C. Neuman and A. Nagy, "Single-molecule force spectroscopy: 
optical tweezers, magnetic tweezers and atomic force microscopy," 
Nature Methods, vol. 5, pp. 491-505, Jun 2008. 
[9] F. Ziemann, et al., "Local Measurements of Viscoelastic Moduli of 
Entangled Actin Networks Using an Oscillating Magnetic Bead 
Micro-Rheometer," Biophysical Journal, vol. 66, pp. 2210-2216, Jun 
1994. 
[10] A. R. Bausch, et al., "Measurement of local viscoelasticity and forces 
in living cells by magnetic tweezers," Biophysical Journal, vol. 76, pp. 
573-579, Jan 1999. 
[11] M. Keller, et al., "Oscillatory magnetic bead rheometer for complex 
fluid microrheometry," Review of Scientific Instruments, vol. 72, pp. 
3626-3634, Sep 2001. 
[12] J. Pokki, et al., "Localized viscoelasticity measurements with 
untethered intravitreal microrobots," Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol 
Soc, vol. 2012, pp. 2813-2816, 2012. 
[13] A. H. B. de Vries, et al., "Micro magnetic tweezers for 
nanomanipulation inside live cells," Biophysical Journal, vol. 88, pp. 
2137-2144, Mar 2005. 
[14] J. K. Fisher, et al., "Thin-foil magnetic force system for 
high-numerical-aperture microscopy," Review of Scientific 
Instruments, vol. 77, p. 023702, Feb 2006. 
[15] P. T. Tang, "Pulse reversal plating of nickel and nickel alloys for 
microgalvanics," Electrochimica Acta, vol. 47, pp. 61-66, Sep 2001. 
[16] G. Fonnum, et al., "Characterisation of Dynabeads (R) by 
magnetization measurements and Mossbauer spectroscopy," Journal of 
Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, vol. 293, pp. 41-47, May 2005. 
[17] I. F. Sbalzarini and P. Koumoutsakos, "Feature point tracking and 
trajectory analysis for video imaging in cell biology," Journal of 
Structural Biology, vol. 151, pp. 182-195, Aug 2005. 
[18] S. Sgobba, "Physics and measurements of magnetic materials," CERN, 
vol. 4, pp. 39-63, 2010. 
[19] D. Benjamin, Metals Handbook: Properties and Selection: Stainless 
Steels, Tool Materials and Special-Purpose Metals, 9th ed. vol. 3: 
American Society for Metals, 1980. 
[20] P. N. Bishop, "Structural macromolecules and supramolecular 
organisation of the vitreous gel," Progress in Retinal and Eye 
Research, vol. 19, pp. 323-344, May 2000. 
[21] Q. G. Xu, et al., "Nanoparticle diffusion in, and microrheology of, the 
bovine vitreous ex vivo," Journal of Controlled Release, vol. 167, pp. 
76-84, Apr 10 2013. 
 
 
3806
