  
? 
AbstractÑRecently, the open-source robot operating system 
(ROS) has been growing rapidly in the robotics community. 
However, the ROS runs on Linux, which does not provide timing 
guarantees for robot motion. This paper present a hybrid 
real-time ROS architecture on multi-core processor 
ÒRGMP-ROSÓ, which consists of two parts including the 
non-real-time subsystem ÒGPOS (General Operating system)Ó 
and the real-time one ÒRTOS (Real-time Operating system)Ó. 
The GPOS is comprised of non-real-time ROS nodes running in 
Linux, while the RTOS only contains real-time ROS nodes 
running in Nuttx. To get higher operational efficiency, the 
RGMP-ROS system is executed by a dual-core processor, one 
CPU for GPOS and the other for RTOS. The RGMP-ROS has 
used in the controller of a 6-DOF modular manipulator, and its 
effectiveness and efficiency are demonstrated by software testing 
and experiments.  The main contributions of the present work lie 
in the realization of real-time ROS architecture and the 
application of multi-core processor in the hybrid control of an 
industrial robot.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
With the development of robotics, two problems in this 
field have been widely concerned in these years.  The first is 
about the enhancement of the development efficiency of the 
controlling software.  As is known, most existing industrial 
robots are designed to perform special tasks in specific 
environments.  Because different robots generally have 
different controlling software, developers always have to 
spend a lot of time writing diverse programs with similar 
functions to meet new operational requirements frequently.  
Therefore, the complexity of programming remains as one of 
the major hurdles in this field [1].   The other problem is about 
the enhancement of the operational efficiency of robot control.  
Such efficiency mainly depends on the execution speed of the 
controlling software. An effective way to solve the first 
problem is to construct modular software architecture.  By 
dividing an application into a number of mutually decoupled 
units, the complexity of the software development can be 
 
Hongxing Wei and Zhen Huang are with the School of Mechanical 
Engineering and Automation, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, PR 
China  (e-mail: weihongxing@buaa.edu.cn ).  
Qiang Yu and Miao Liu are with the Shanghai Institute of Microsystem 
and Information Technology, Shanghai 200050, China (e-mail: 
yuq825@gmail.com and threewater1@163.com ). 
Yong Guan is with College of Information Engineering, Capital Normal 
University, Beijing, 100048, PR China (e-mail: guanyxxxy@263.net ) 
Jindong Tan is with the Department of Mechanical, Aerospace, and 
Biomedical Engineering, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, Tennessee 
37996-2110, USA (e-mail: tan@utk.edu ) 
reduced to a large extent. The designers only need to update 
the corresponding software modules, when changing the 
functionalities or adding features to the robots.  Because most 
of the modules are reusable and portable for similar 
operational tasks, the adaptation of the controlling software 
can be accomplished quickly.  Although the modularization of 
software is much more difficult than that of hardware, some 
modular frameworks have been successfully applied in the 
controlling software of robots such as CARMEN [2], Player 
[3], LCM [4], YARP [5], and etc. Some surveys on robot 
middleware and robot development environment are given in 
[6] and [7]. 
As mentioned above, the operational efficiency of 
industrial robots is mainly determined by the running speed of 
the controlling software.  There are several ways to speed up 
the software system.  Firstly, a number of microcontroller 
modules can be connected together to form a message-based 
[8] or event-based [9] distributed control system for the robot, 
in which the controller nodes communicate with one another 
through a field bus [10].  Secondly, the real-time operating 
system and the non-real-time one can be combined together to 
construct a hybrid one [11], which can handle both real-time 
and non-real-time tasks simultaneously by separating the 
corresponding interrupts automatically. Thirdly, the 
multi-core processors can be employed to form a distributed 
system [12], and thus the real-time and non-real-time software 
can run in different CPUs of the same processor.  
Conventional systems are generally based on two-level 
single-core processors with the low-level processor for the 
real-time software and the high-level ones for the 
non-real-time software [13].  Because a considerable amount 
of time is consumed by the frequent communication between 
different processors, the operational efficiency of the whole 
system is inevitably lowered down. Obviously, such 
insufficiency of the conventional two-level systems can be 
overcome effectively by the multi-core method. To 
summarize, the modular distributed architecture, the hybrid 
operating system and the multi-core processors are three main 
techniques available for the enhancement of the operational 
efficiency of industrial robots.   
Recently, the open-source robot operating system (ROS) 
has been growing rapidly in the robotics community [14].  
Based on the ROS framework, many researchers have 
developed their software for diverse robots such as Barrett 
WAM [15] and Raven-II [16].  However, ROS runs on Linux, 
which does not provide timing guarantees for robot motion. 
RGMP-ROS: a Real-time ROS Architecture of Hybrid RTOS and 
GPOS on Multi-core Processor 
Hongxing Wei, Member, IEEE, Zhen Huang, Qiang Yu, Miao Liu, Yong Guan?and Jindong Tan, 
Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2482
  
The need for timing guarantees drives robot designers to 
partition robots into real-time and non real-time subsystems. 
In order to meet real-time needs, there are two possible 
approach. The first is attaching embedded real-time systems to 
ROS, such as ROS Industrial and ROS Bridge. A second 
approach is to port some ROS packages to a real-time Unix 
version [17]. 
Unlike the above approach, this paper present a real-time 
ROS architecture called RGMP-ROS, which is based on the 
hybrid OS platform RGMP (RTOS and GPOS on 
Multi-Processors) developed by our research team [18]. Here, 
we chose an open source Nuttx [19]. To facilitate the 
operation, a dual-core processor is used to run the whole 
software system. The real-time and the non-real-time 
subsystems of RGMP-ROS are executed in different CPUs of 
the dual-core processor, respectively. To verify its 
effectiveness, the RGMP-ROS system is further applied in the 
industrial controller of 6-DOF modular manipulator designed 
by the authors, and the feasibility and stability of the whole 
software system is finally demonstrated by the testing 
experiments.  The main contributions of the present work lie 
in two aspects: (a) the real-time control functionality is 
integrated into the ROS-based hybrid operating system; (b) a 
dual-core processor is employed to run the hybrid operating 
system, one core for the real-time part and the other for the 
non-real-time part.    
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.  
Section ? introduces the technical backgrounds of ROS, 
Nuttx and RGMP.  Section ? presents the design and 
implementation of RGMP-ROS.  Software testing is then 
conducted in section ? for the purpose of performance 
verification.  In section ?, the RGMP-ROS system is further 
applied in the controller of a six-DOF modular manipulator, 
and some experiments are done to demonstrate its feasibility.  
Finally, the conclusions are drawn in section ?.    
II. TECHNICAL BACKGROUNDS 
A. ROS 
ROS (Robot Operating System) is an open-source and 
reusable software platform providing libraries, tools and 
conventions that can help to create high-performance robot 
applications quickly and easily. It provides the international 
robotics community with standardized interfaces to the 
hardware, tools for creating, debugging, distributing, and 
running procedures, and libraries for developing programs. 
Now, about 500 packages have been made available in the 
ROS setting by approximately 30 institutions [20]-[22].  
Linux OS
Lib: 
Boost 
C++ Lib
XML 
RPCPP
Math Libc Libc++
Packages:
roscore roscpp roslang Std_msg
Nodes:
Master Node Node 1 Node 2 Node 3
 
Fig. 1. The ROS software architecture 
ROS 
Master
ROS 
Node
ROS 
Node
Computer A
Linux
ROS 
Node
ROS 
Node
ROS 
Node
Robot
Controller
Linux
WiFi Router
XML-RPC
 
Fig. 2. The remote control model of ROS 
ROS is a modular software platform installed on the Linux 
operating system.  It contains a number of software modules 
encapsulated as nodes, including the master node and the 
functional nodes.  Fig. 1 gives the standard architecture of the 
ROS software system, which consists of libraries, packages 
and nodes installed on Linux OS.  Such a modular architecture 
supports distributed network communication.  Like the router 
in a LAN, the master node administrates and monitors the 
running of the functional nodes and their peer-to-peer 
communications.  Fig. 2 shows a typical remote control model 
of ROS.  The ROS in the robot is connected to that in the 
remote control computer through the WIFI router.  The 
communications among nodes are realized by the XML/RPC 
calls under the TCP/IP protocol.  Fig. 3 illustrates the ROS 
communication model and its corresponding OSI model.  It is 
seen that an application layer based on the XML-RPC HTTP 
protocol is constructed on the TCP/IP architecture.  Therefore, 
the messages transmitted by the nodes are not data packages 
but webpage files satisfying the http protocol. 
Physical
Data Link
Network
Transport
Session
Presentation
Application
VNET Ethernet
IP
TCP UDP
ROS
Master
ROS
Node
XML-RPC
HTTP
OSI Model ROS Model
 
Fig. 3. The ROS communication model and its 
 corresponding OSI model 
B. Nuttx 
In order to construct the hybrid operating system, we need a 
portable real-time operating system architecture.  As we all 
know, there are many real-time operating system, such as 
VxWorks, QNX, eCOS, ?cOS-II, etc. However, we want to 
choose a open-source RTOS to easily extend ROS. Due to this 
reason, Nuttx is chosen as the prototype of our RTOS.  
Nuttx is an open-source embedded real time operating 
system (RTOS) first released in 2007 by Gregory Nutt [19].  
Nuttx supports the Posix and ANSI standards, and can be 
applied in microcontrollers from 8-bit to 32-bit.  In addition, 
2483
  
by adopting the standard APIs from Unix and other common 
RTOS's such as VxWorks, Nuttx has some functionalities not 
available under the Posix and ANSI standards.  Compared 
with other real-time operating systems such as VxWorks, 
Windows CE and ?C/OS-II, Nuttx has the following 
advantages:  
(1) Practical system services.  Nuttx provides a number of 
system supports such as UIP protocol stack, networking, 
device drivers and virtue file system, which are useful for 
practical systems.  
(2) Small footprint.  Nuttx only has very small memory 
requirement that can be met in any application cases.  For 
example, the 4MB memory released by the GPOS of our 
hybrid OS is enough to run our Nuttx-based RTOS.  
(3) Easy extension.  It is convenient to extend Nuttx to new 
processor architectures such as the SoC architecture and the 
board architectures.  This makes it possible to transplant ROS 
real-time nodes between different CPUs of a multi-core 
processor.  Therefore, in our hybrid OS, the ROS real-time 
nodes run in the Nuttx as applications of RTOS.   
C. RGMP  
RGMP is a software framework developed by our research 
team [18], whose architecture is shown in Fig. 4.  It can be 
used to run two operating systems simultaneously in a 
controller having a multi-core processor.  One is the 
Linux-based general purpose operating system (GPOS), and 
the other is the real time operating system (RTOS).  GPOS and 
RTOS occupy different CPUs, respectively, and they 
communicate with each other through the VNET channel. 
VNET is a virtual network interface and interacts with the 
underlying data by sharing memory. Meanwhile, standard 
network interface protocols are used to establish standard 
network communication interface based on TCP/IP protocol 
between Nuttx real-time system and Linux. 
RGMP has three functionalities.  The first one is to boot the 
whole system.  When RGMP starts, Linux initializes all the 
hardware resources including the CPUs, the memory and the 
peripheral devices at first.  Then, the GPOS module releases 
two blocks of memory and a CPU.  After this, the RTOS is 
loaded into one block of the released memory and executed by 
the released CPU.  The second functionality of RGMP is to 
realize the communication between GPOS and RTOS during 
the running process.  Such communication is performed in the 
other released memory block.  The last but not the least 
functionality of RGMP is to provide a great amount of 
programming resources such as the interface functions for 
interrupt registration, memory allocation, BIOS reading, etc.  
With these resources, the users can develop their own hybrid 
operating system quickly.   
III. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION OF RGMP-ROS  
A. Overall design 
RGMP-ROS is developed by using ROS, Nuttx and RGMP.  
As illustrated in Fig. 5, RGMP-ROS is a hybrid operating 
system running in a dual-core processor and composed of two 
parts.  One part is the standard non-real-time ROS system (i.e., 
GPOS) installed in Linux, and the other part is the real-time 
ROS system (i.e., RTOS) running in Nuttx.  Each part has its 
own CPU, memory, interrupts and peripheral devices.  
Accordingly, there are two kinds of ROS nodes, i.e., the 
real-time nodes and the non-real-time ones.  The 
communications among nodes are performed by the 
XML/RPC calls under the TCP/IP protocol.  Because the 
real-time ROS and the non-real-time ROS run in different 
CPUs, the RGMP-VNET acts as the channel for their 
communications.  
CPU A
Linux Kernel
Linux device driver
Linux network port
CPU B
Nuttx Kernel
Nuttx device driver
Nuttx network port
Communications Client Communications Client
Master
node
Non 
realtime 
node
realtime 
node
Non 
realtime 
node
realtime 
node
realtime 
node
VNET
 
Fig. 5. The RGMP-ROS architecture 
B. Implementation  
RGMP-ROS has four software modules including ROS, 
RGMP, Nuttx and RTroscpp, which are developed in personal 
computer.  The developments of these modules require the 
supports of the following software: Linux, ROS, Git, Qemu, 
Vim (or Emacs), Gcc, Gdb, Ctages, Eclipse, and the source 
codes of RGMP, Linux and Nuttx.  Besides, we have to add 
some special software packages to Nuttx for our program 
development, although Nuttx has rich resources itself.  Firstly, 
in order to develop the real-time ROS nodes such as the 
RTroscpp nodes, the C++ support needs to be added.  Here, 
the light-weight library ?Clibc++ is inserted into Nuttx for the 
purpose of developing light-weight RTOS.  Secondly, the 
floating-point math library in standard libc should be 
appended, due to the fact that floating-point calculation is 
always requisite in the real-time control of robots.  Thirdly, 
the http protocol needs to be transplanted, because the 
messages transmitted in the communications are special http 
webpage files not supported by the UIP protocol stack of 
 
  
VNET              
Real-time device 
                       
drivers                         
                  
Fig. 4. The software architecture of RGMP                         
                                         
Linux Kernel                         
GPOS                   
Linux system calls                         
                  
Linux device drivers                         
                  
CPU1             
RTOS Kernel                         
RTOS                   
CPU2             
Real-time calls                         
                  
               
2484
  
Nuttx.  Fourthly, the drivers of the real-time PCI, Ethercat and 
CAN bus devices are also added to Nuttx, since each real-time 
bus has a separate protocol framework.   
IV. SOFTWARE TESTING  
An X86-based industrial robot dual-core controller is 
employed to test the overall performance of RGMP-ROS, 
including the independency between GPOS and RTOS, and 
the execution efficiency of the whole system.  The testing 
platform consists of the following hardware: (1) mainboard: 
AIMB-780; (2) CPU?Intel(R) Pentium (R) Dual CPU E2200 
of 2.2GHz; (3) Memory: DDR2 of 2GB; (4) CAN device: 
Advantech PCI-1680U CAN; (5) VGA card: HD6670 DDR5 
of 1GB.  The software of the testing platform includes: (1) 
Ubuntu 11.10 with Linux Kernel 3.2; (2) the fully installed 
ROS future; (3) OpenGL v1.4; (4) RGMP v4.3; (5) Nuttx 
v6.26 with ?Clibc++, math lib and real-time device drivers; (6) 
Matlab 2010a.  
A. CPU occupancy testing  
The CPU occupation of the dual-core processor is tested 
and compared in two cases.  In the first case, we run the ROS 
core node and all the non-real-time ROS nodes in Linux, but 
the real-time system in Nuttx is not started.  The CPU 
occupation result is shown by the system resource manager 
(see Fig. 6), which indicates that the GPOS tasks are shared by 
both CPUs.  The occupancy rate of CPU1 is 52.9%, and that 
of CPU2 is 20.4%.  In the second case, we run the 
non-real-time ROS nodes in Linux and the real-time ROS 
nodes in Nuttx at the same time.  The system resource 
manager in Linux then displays that the occupancy rate of 
CPU2 becomes zero (see Fig. 7), which shows that CPU2 is 
totally occupied by the Nuttx real-time system.  Therefore, 
GPOS and RTOS can run simultaneously, each occupying a 
separate CPU.  
 
Fig. 6. CPU occupancy rates in case 
 
Fig. 7. CPU occupancy rates in case 2 
B. Real-time interrupt response time testing  
An important index to evaluate the performance of the 
real-time system is the interrupt response time.  To test it 
exactly, we only run a single real-time ROS node in Nuttx, 
which handles the external timer interrupt.  Two different 
cases are surveyed to show the effects of the non-real-time 
nodes on the real-time interrupt response time (see Fig. 8).  In 
case A, the real-time ROS node runs in Nuttx when only the 
ROS master node is running simultaneously in Linux; while in 
case B, the real-time ROS node runs with a 3D RVIZ 
simulation program running meanwhile in Linux.  For the 
convenience of displaying, a Matlab script is written to show 
the interrupt response time dynamically.  The testing results 
are given in Fig. 8, where the upper straight line denotes the 
highest value of the interrupt response time, while the lower 
one indicates the lowest value.  It is seen that the interrupt 
response time in both cases lies in the same interval from 
1250ns to 2250ns, implying that the effect of the non-real-time 
system on the real-time one is negligible.  This again verifies 
the independency between these two subsystems. 
 
Case A                                 Case B 
Fig. 8. The real-time interrupt response time                                       
C. Communication time testing  
Here, the term Òcommunication timeÓ refers to the response 
time between different ROS nodes in communication.  The 
communication time between non-real-time ROS nodes can 
be tested by using the standard ROS tool ÒrospingÓ, and that 
between two real-time ROS nodes may be measured simply by 
the system timer.  To simplify the testing, only a single 
real-time ROS node is running in Nuttx, and only the roscore 
and the non-real-time ROS node ÒhelloworldÓ for message 
printing are running in Linux.  Because the communications 
among ROS nodes are made by the mechanism of XML-RPC 
call under the TCP protocol, the communication time is 
generally not fixed.   
 
Table 1. The average communication time                         
Communication types  Time  
 Non-real-time node ? Non-real-time 
node 
>1ms 
Non-real-time node ? Real-time 
node 
0.1~1ms
 
Real-time node ? Real-time node <100ns 
The average communication time is presented in Table 1 
for three different kinds of node communications.  It is shown 
that the average communication time between two 
Interrupt response time (ns)                                      
time                           
time                           
Interrupt response time (ns)                                      
2485
  
non-real-time nodes is longer than 1ms, that between a 
non-real-time node and a real-time one is about 0.1ms to 1ms, 
and that between two real-time nodes is less than 100ns.  
Therefore, the average communication time of the ROS nodes 
is acceptable for the controllers of practical industrial robots.  
V. EXPERIMENTS  
In this section, the RGMP-ROS system is applied in the 
controller of a 6-DOF modular manipulator developed by our 
research team.  The hardware of the controller is the same as 
that of the testing platform given in section ?.  The software 
architecture is shown in Fig. 9.  For the convenience of 
communication and control, an ID number is assigned to each 
module of the manipulator.  When the controller emits an 
instruction containing an ID number, only the module having 
the same ID number will receive and respond to it.  If the ID 
number of the instruction is 255 (i.e., the hexadecimal 0xFF), 
it is a broadcast instruction that will be received by all the 
robotic modules with no response.  
Simulation Node
ROS
Application
Environment
ROS
Application
Nodes
Visual
Application
Nodes
ROS Operational Architecture,
Master Node
Robot Real-time
Applications
Ethernet
Linux Kernel
Shared
Memory
Real-time Kernel
CPU1 CPU2
IPI interface
Dual-core
Real-time
Operating System
IOAPIC
Non-real-time
Devices
Real-time
Devices
Interrupt Interrupt
Non-real-time
Region
Real-time
Region
 
Fig. 9. The software architecture of the modular 
A. Visualized teaching control  
The RGMP-ROS system is installed into both the 
manipulator controller and a remote computer, which are 
connected through Ethernet.  Real-time control can be 
realized by running the real-time ROS nodes in Nuttx, while 
the remote manipulation and online teaching can be 
performed by running the non-real-time ROS nodes in Linux.  
Fig. 10 illustrates the overall control architecture of the 
manipulator.  The online teaching control is visualized in the 
ROS 3D demonstration platform ÒRVIZÓ.  The model of the 
manipulator can be directly loaded from Solidworks into 
RVIZ to perform 3D simulation.  In RVIZ, the end module of 
the 3D simulation model can be dragged by using the mouse to 
carry out the online teaching.  As shown in Fig. 11, the path 
planning can also be realized for the manipulator in such a 3D 
simulation way.  
Joint Module
Assembly
CAN Bus
X86 dual core controller 
and CAN card
Modular manipulater
ROS Simulation
Robot 
teaching
ROS
Linux Nuttx
RGMP
 
Fig. 10. The overall control architecture of the modular 
manipulator 
B. Motion control  
The real-time ROS system performs real-time operations on 
the manipulator, including the closed-loop motion control, the 
kinematics solution, the status inquiry, the error handling, etc.  
During the operation process of the manipulator, anyone of 
the angular velocity, angular displacement (or position) and 
electric current can be used to control the rotation of the joints.  
Here, the position based method is employed, and so the 
Fig.11. Path planning in RVIZ                          
2486
  
corresponding angular displacement information is emitted to 
every joint to limit its motion range.  It is found by motion 
control experiments that synchronous movement among the 
joints can not be well guaranteed by the position based method 
directly.  Besides the method itself, there are several other 
factors affecting the motion synchronism, such as the different 
reduction gear ratios of the joints and the friction.  
Theoretically speaking, to reduce the friction, to adjust the 
reduction gear ratios, or even to replace the position based 
method by the angular velocity or electric current based 
method, can be helpful to realize the motion synchronism.  
However, all these three ways may bring about unpredictable 
difficulties.  Instead, we try a simpler and more feasible way 
here.  A refined kinematics ROS node is developed to perform 
high-frequency interpolation calculation to yield more exact 
control information for the angular displacement.  As shown 
in Table 2, the motion synchronism of the six joints is well 
guaranteed by this way.   
 
Table 2. The time for the joints to rotate one degree angle 
Joints 
Time (ms) 
The position based 
control method 
The refined interpolation 
calculation method 
1 350 110 
2 330 108 
3 331 110 
4 341 109 
5 320 100 
6 310 105 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
A hybrid real-time ROS architecture called RGMP-ROS is 
developed by using the libraries and tools provided by ROS 
and the hybrid OS platform RGMP.  It consists of two parts 
including the non-real-time GPOS and the real-time RTOS, 
and accordingly there are two kinds of ROS nodes, i.e., the 
non-real-time ROS nodes running in Linux and the real-time 
ROS nodes running in Nuttx.  In order to enhance the 
operational efficiency, a dual-core processor, instead of the 
conventional two-level single-core processors, is used to 
execute the RGMP-ROS system with one CPU for the 
non-real-time nodes and the other for the real-time nodes.  The 
RGMP-ROS system is further applied in the industrial 
controller of a 6-DOF modular manipulator designed by our 
research team.  Finally, the effectiveness of the RGMP-ROS 
system is verified by software testing and experiments.   
In future, much more testing and improvement still need to 
be conducted to enhance the comprehensive performance of 
the software system.  For example, the angular velocity or 
electric current based method can be tried to get a more exact 
synchronous motion control.  In due time, we will upload the 
software system to the web of ROS for more extensive testing 
and applications by the worldwide robotics community.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the National High Technology 
Research and Development Program of China (Ò863Ó 
Program) (2012AA041402 and 2012AA041405), National 
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61175079 
and No. 51105012).   
REFERENCES  
[1] Z. X. Pan, J. Polden, N. Larkin, S. V. Duin, and J. Norrish, ÒRecent 
progress on programming methods for industrial robots,Ó Robot. 
Comp.-Int. Manuf., vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 87Ð94, 2012.    
[2] M. Montemerlo, N. Roy, and S. Thrun, ÒPerspectives on 
standardization in mobile robot programming: The carnegie mellon 
navigation (CARMEN) toolkit,Ó in Proc. of the IROS, pp. 2436Ð2441, 
2003. 
[3] B. P. Gerkey, R. T. Vaughan, and A. Howard, ÒThe Player/Stage 
Project: Tools for Multi-Robot and Distributed Sensor Systems,Ó in 
Proc. of the 11th Int. Conf. on Advanced Robotics, pp. 317Ð323, 2003. 
[4] A. Huang, E. Olson, and D. Moore, ÒLCM: Lightweight 
communications and marshalling,Ó in Proc. of the IROS, pp. 
4057Ð4062, 2010. 
[5] G. Metta, P. Fitzpatrick, and L. Natale, ÒYARP: Yet another robot 
platform,Ó Int. Journal on Advanced Robotics Systems, pp. 43Ð48, 
2006. 
[6] A. Elkady and T. M. Sobh, ÒRobotics Middleware: A Comprehensive 
Literature Survey and Attribute-Based Bibliography,Ó Journal of 
Robotics, 2012. 
[7] J. Kramer and M. Scheutz, ÒDevelopment environments for 
autonomous mobile robots: A survey,Ó Autonomous Robots, vol. 22, no. 
2, pp. 101Ð132, 2007. 
[8] C. Lee, and Y. S. Xu, ÒMessage-based evaluation in scheme for 
high-level robot control,Ó J. Intell. Robot. Syst., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 
109Ð119, 1999.  
[9] X. M. Li, C. J.Yang, Y. Chen, and X. D. Hu, ÒHybrid event based 
control architecture for tele-robotic systems controlled through 
internet,Ó J. Zhej. Univ. Sci., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 296Ð302, 2004.  
[10] V. M. F. Santos, and F. M. T. Silva, ÒDesign and low-level control of a 
humanoid robot using a distributed architecture approach,Ó J. Vibr. 
Contr., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 1431Ð1456, 2006.  
[11] M. Liu, Z. L. Shao, M. Wang, H. X. Wei, and T. M.Wang, 
ÒImplementing hybrid operating systems with two-level hardware 
interrupts,Ó in Proc 28th IEEE Int. Real-Time Systems Symposium, pp. 
244Ð253, 2007.  
[12] S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, C. J. Helfrich, et al., ÒHERB: a home 
exploring robotic butler,Ó Auton. Robot., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 5Ð20, 2010.  
[13] M. Liu, D. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Wang, Z. L. Shao, ÒOn improving 
real-time interrupt latencies of hybrid operating systems with two-level 
hardware interrupts,Ó IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 
978Ð991, 2011.   
[14] http://www.ros.org/.  
[15] J. M. Romano, J. P. Brindza, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, ÒROS 
open-source audio recognizer: ROAR environmental sound detection 
tools for robot programming,Ó Auton. Robot., vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 
207Ð215, 2013.  
[16] B. Hannaford, J. Rosen, D. W. Friedman, et al., ÒRaven-II: an open 
platform for surgical robotics research. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 
60, no. 4, pp. 954Ð959, 2013.  
[17] P. Bouchier, Embedded ROS [ros topics]. IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., 
vol.18, no. 3, pp. 17-19, 2013 
[18] Q. Yu, H. Wei, M. Liu and etc. A novel multi-OS architecture for robot 
application. in Proc. of the ROBIO, pp. 2301-2306, 2013.  
[19] http://www.nuttx.org/.   
[20] S. Cousins, ÒExponential Growth of ROS,Ó IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., 
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 19Ð20, 2011.   
[21] S. Cousins, B. Gerkey, K. Conley, and W. Garage, ÒSharing Software 
with ROS,Ó IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 12Ð14, 2010. 
[22] S. Cousins, ÒROS on the PR2,Ó IEEE Robot. Autom. Mag., vol. 13, no. 
3, pp. 23Ð25, 2010.  
2487
