  
? 
Abstract— When we touch a human body, the flesh yields to 
our touch and we feel a sensation of softness. In virtual training 
systems for medical procedures such as palpation, the display of 
softness at the fingertips is essential. This paper proposes a 
softness-display device using a flexible sheet, and we present the 
concept of softness display at multiple fingers by combining the 
developed softness-display device and a multi-fingered haptic 
interface robot consisting of a five-fingered hand and an arm. 
Further, we carried out several experiments, the results of 
which show the validity of the proposed system and its great 
potential. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Haptic interfaces allow users to communicate with a 
virtual reality (VR) environment using the sense of touch. The 
user of the haptic interface can feel force and tactile sensations 
from the VR environment; further, the user can provide force, 
tactile and position information to the VR environment. 
Therefore, the haptic interface provides a bidirectional 
interaction between the user and the VR environment. Haptic 
interfaces have become key input/output devices for 
communication with highly realistic sensations and have been 
used in many application areas (for example, see [1]?[4]). 
One application area is virtual training systems in 
medicine, manufacturing, and other fields requiring skilled 
use of the hands. For example, in the medical field, expert 
skills such as palpation are obtained by long-term training, and 
this skill is normally acquired by the experience of working 
with actual patients. However, it is difficult for residents and 
medical students to train directly on actual human bodies due 
to patient safety issues, and training with animals is also 
problematic because of ethical concerns [5], [6]. Creating a 
virtual human model in a VR environment with a haptic 
interface eliminates the need for actual patients, and a trainee 
can gain skills based on realistic touch sensation. For gaining 
skills such as palpation through such a virtual training system, 
the softness display at human multiple fingertips is critical. 
Thus, a haptic interface that can present the sensation felt 
when human touches soft, yielding objects, such as human 
flesh, is required. 
Our perceived softness when we touch a soft or yielding 
object with fingers is based on a combination of kinesthetic 
information [7] (force/position information) and cutaneous 
information [8] (surface deformation information of fingertip) 
[9], [10]. In fact, the softness of the object is perceived by 
 
*This work was supported by the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications SCOPE and by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 23700143. 
T. Endo, Y. Kazama, and H. Kawasaki are with the Faculty of Engineering, 
Gifu University, Gifu, Japan (e-mail: tendo@gifu-u.ac.jp). 
S. Tanimura was with the Faculty of Engineering, Gifu University, Gifu, 
Japan, and now he is with Sanwa Robotics Co., Ltd., Nagano, Japan. 
cutaneous information, which is obtained by changing the 
contact area of a fingertip, namely skin deformation, and 
kinesthetic information, which is obtained by the force from 
the object and the position of the finger. It has been found that 
cutaneous information is more dominant than the kinesthetic 
information in the perception of softness [11]. It is desirable to 
present both types of information simultaneously for realistic 
softness display. 
Although there are many kinds of research on softness 
display, if we focus attention on haptic interfaces, which can 
present the softness feeling at the fingers using both 
kinesthetic and cutaneous information, they can be roughly 
divided into two groups: haptic interfaces which control the 
contact area between the finger and the virtual soft object (for 
example, [12]?[14]) and haptic interfaces which display/ 
prepare a substitute with the same softness as a real object (for 
example [15]?[17]). In [12]?[14], the developed haptic 
interfaces consist of cutaneous information display, which 
controls the contact area, and a force-reflecting device for 
kinesthetic information display. In particular, control of the 
contact area at the fingertips was carried out using a rubber 
membrane and air pressure in [12], by a set of cylinders of 
different radii in [13], and by arrayed pins in [14]. However, 
the physical parameters of the user’s finger and the displayed 
object are indispensable to the derivation of the contact area; 
human physical parameters have large individual differences, 
and identification of the parameters is required for each user. 
Further, the size of the devices is large, and the extension to 
the display at multiple fingers is difficult. On the other hand, 
for haptic interfaces using a substitute with the same softness 
as the target object, a breast palpation simulator has been 
developed [15]. In their system, a pneumatic parallel 
manipulator was installed in the inside of a commercially 
available breast model made of silicon. In this setting, the user 
can feel a realistic touch sensation of the cutaneous surface; 
further, the system can present a lump at any position by 
introducing the manipulator. Although their system 
specializes in breast palpation and is considered to be useful, it 
is lacking in versatility. Another softness-display device has 
been developed using a large flexible sheet [16]. Both ends of 
the sheet were connected to the manipulators, and tension is 
applied to the sheet by pulling these ends; thus, the system 
could vary the softness in the sheet-normal direction. 
Touching this flexible sheet, the user feels the same softness as 
he or she would touch a real object. However, the device is 
large-sized, and the system has difficulty simulating situations 
in which the object is not uniform but has a complicated form 
and where the softness differs with each finger. The FEELEX 
in [17] can display a substitute with the same softness as the 
target object; namely, the system can present a deformable 
surface using many separate sets of piston-crank mechanisms, 
but its workspace is limited and is small. 
Softness Display by a Multi-Fingered Haptic Interface Robot* 
Takahiro Endo, Satoshi Tanimura, Yuta Kazama, and Haruhisa Kawasaki 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 826
  
We previously developed a side-faced-type multi-fingered 
haptic interface robot [18], which can present three- 
directional forces at all five human fingertips. To manipulate 
the haptic interface, the user wears a finger holder on each 
fingertip, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The connection between the 
haptic interface and the user is realized through the finger 
holder as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Here, the finger holder is slightly 
hard; thus, it is considered that, compared with touching an 
actual soft object, different cutaneous information (surface 
deformation) is displayed at the fingertip by the above haptic 
interface. In fact, it is known that the perception ability of the 
fingertip, including the finger’s ability at palpation, declines 
when the finger is equipped with a rigid fingertip sheath [19]. 
From these points of view, in this paper, we developed a new 
finger holder installing a tension-controllable flexible sheet 
into the finger holder. And, by integrating the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot and the newly developed 
finger holder, we propose the concept of softness display at 
multiple fingers. That is, the tension is applied to the flexible 
sheet in the new finger holder by pulling both ends of the sheet, 
and the sheet has same softness as the target object. Then, the 
sheet is displayed/prepared to a user’s multiple fingers by the 
side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot. Thereby, 
in addition to the display of a softness feeling at multiple 
fingertips, the situation where the softness differs with each 
finger can be realized. We also can ensure a large workspace. 
In the next section, we introduce the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot. Section III presents the 
developed finger holder for the softness display (henceforth, 
the “softness-display device”) and presents the integration of 
the softness-display device and the side-faced-type multi- 
fingered haptic interface robot. Experimental results are 
shared in section IV. Finally, section V presents our 
conclusions. 
II. SIDE-FACED-TYPE MULTI-FINGERED HAPTIC INTERFACE 
ROBOT 
A side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot 
[18] shown in Fig. 1, can present three-directional forces at the 
user’s five fingertips. The specifications of the robot are 
shown in Table I. The robot can be briefly summarized as 
follows. 
The haptic interface robot consists of an arm and a 
five-fingered haptic hand. The arm has 6 joints allowing 6 
degrees of freedom (DOF). The haptic hand is constructed of 
five haptic fingers. Each haptic finger has 4 joints allowing 3 
DOF. The first joint relative to the hand base allows 
abduction/adduction, while the second and the third joints 
allow flexion/extension. The fourth joint is interlocked with 
the third joint through a closed-loop mechanism, and the 
haptic hand has 15 DOF. Further, a three-axis force sensor is 
installed at the top of each haptic finger. To manipulate the 
haptic interface, the user wears a finger holder on each 
fingertip, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The finger holder has a steel 
sphere, and the haptic finger has a permanent magnet at its 
fingertips. By means of the magnet force, the finger holder can 
be connected to the interface, as shown in Fig. 1 (c). Here, note 
that the sphere forms a passive spherical joint when attached 
to the permanent magnet at the force sensor tip. Its role is to 
adjust for differences between the human and haptic finger 
orientations. Furthermore, the magnet connection breaks if the 
user pulls his or her finger with a force of about 4.3N. For 
more technical details, please see [18]. 
III. SOFTNESS-DISPLAY SYSTEM 
A.  Design Concept and Mechanical Design 
The aim of this paper is to realize a haptic interface that can 
display the softness at multiple human fingertips. To realize 
this aim, we combined a softness-display device (namely, the 
new finger holder) and the side-faced-type multi-fingered 
haptic interface robot. In this setting, the softness-display 
device realizes a substitute with same softness as the target 
object, and the side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface 
robot displays the substitute (namely, the softness-display 
device) to a user’s fingers. 
First, we introduce the developed softness-display device, 
which can have the same softness as the target object by 
installing the tension-controllable flexible sheet into the finger 
holder. In choosing the flexible sheet, we carried out a 
preliminary experiment to examine whether a sheet could 
present softness like that of human flesh. We used the 
hyper-gel sheet [20] (Exseal Co.), which has a thickness of 1 
mm and a hardness of 30 as measured using an ASKER 
durometer (Type C). Further, since the device must be 
deployed at the human fingertips, we had to consider the 
miniaturization of the device and shortening of the device 
width. 
The mechanical structure of the developed softness- 
display device is shown in Fig. 2. For the miniaturization of 
 
(b) Finger holder
(a) Overall system (c) Finger holder and its 
connection to haptic finger 
Figure 1.  Side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot. 
TABLE I.  SPECIFICATIONS OF SIDE-FACED-TYPE 
MULTI-FINGERED HAPTIC INTERFACE ROBOT 
Degrees of Freedom
Hand: 15 DOF (Number of haptc fingers: 5)
Finger: 4 joints allowing 3 DOF 
Arm: 6 joints allowing 6 DOF 
Performance 
Maximum output of finger: over 3.8 N 
Maximum displayable stiffness: 6kN/m 
Frequency response: 9 Hz 
Sampling time of control: 1kHz 
 
827
  
the device, we used one motor (maxon DC motor RE10), and 
the rotation of the motor was transmitted to both ends of the 
sheet through the gear mechanism. To enable shortening of the 
device width, both ends of the flexible sheet were connected to 
the gear mechanism through the guide axes. When the motor 
rotates as shown in Fig. 2 (b), the parts of the sheet at the guide 
axes rotated in the opposite direction by gear mechanics, 
respectively. Thus, we can adjust the tension of the sheet by 
pulling the sheet from both ends. The domain on the sheet 
which a user touches is 20 mm ? 20 mm. The maximum 
penetration depth of the sheet is 7 mm. 
The developed softness-display device is shown in Fig. 3. 
The device is connected to the side-faced-type multi-fingered 
haptic interface robot through the steel sphere installed at the 
top of the device. For example, Fig. 3 (c) shows the case in 
which a user connected his thumb and index finger to the 
haptic interface using two softness-display devices. If we use 
five softness-display devices, we can display the softness at 
the user’s five fingertips. The weight and size of the 
developed device are 49g and 26 mm ? 37.5 mm? 60 mm, 
respectively. 
B. Control System for Softness-Display System 
The control of the softness-display system consists of the 
control of the softness-display device and the control of the 
side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot. First, we 
describe the control of the softness-display device. In the 
softness-display device, the tension of the flexible sheet is 
controlled by the motor, and the change of the tension drives 
the change of the Young’s modulus of the sheet. We used the 
PID control of the rotational angle of the motor. The control 
system consists of a control PC, an up/down counter (CNT), a 
digital-to-analogue convertor (D/A), and a motor driver. The 
control PC reads the value of the encoder through the CNT 
and outputs the control signal through the D/A, and the 
rotational angle of the motor is controlled by the PID control 
of the angle 
), ( d ) ( ) ( ) (
3
 
0 
2 1
t e k s s e k t e k t ?
t
? ? ? ?
?
        (1) 
where ?(t) is the torque of the motor, ?(t) is the rotational 
angle of the motor, ?
 d
(t) is the desired rotational angle, and 
e(t) = ?
d
(t) ? ?(t). Furthermore, k
i 
, i = 1, 2, 3 is the positive 
feedback gain. The sampling time of the control is 1 ms.  
Next, we explain the control of the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot. In particular, we 
explain it by dividing the free space case, where there is no 
contact between the fingertip and the virtual object, and the 
constraint space case, where the fingertip has contact with the 
virtual object. 
In the free space, the haptic fingers of the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot are controlled by force 
control 
), (                                        
d ) ( ) ( ) (
3
 
0 
2 1
t
s s t t
T
t
T T
f d F
e F e F F
q K F J
F J K F J K ?
? ? ?
? ?
?
     (2) 
where ?
F 
= col[?
1
,…, ?
5
]?R
15
 is the joint torque of the haptic 
finger, J
F
 is a Jacobian, F
 
= col[F
1
,…, F
5
]?R
15
 is a force at 
the fingertip, F
d  
=col[F
d1
,…, F
d5
]?R
15
 is the desired force, F
e 
= F
d 
? F, q
f  
= col[q
1
,…, q
5
]?R
15
 is a joint angle of the haptic 
finger, and K
i 
, i = 1, 2, 3 is the positive feedback gain matrix 
[21]. In (2), the third term is a feed-forward term for the 
reaction force and the last term is the velocity feedback to 
employ the active damping. Here, note that we did not 
consider the influence of the gravity of the softness-display 
device because the device is light. Since we consider the 
manipulation of the haptic finger in the free space, the desired 
forces at the five fingertips were set as F
d 
= 0. Then, the user’s 
finger does not penetrate into the sheet, and the user can 
manipulate his or her finger freely with the same feeling as in a 
conventional finger holder [18]. Here, the stiffness of the 
flexible sheet in the softness-display device must be controlled 
at a high level by giving tension to the sheet when the stiffness 
of the sheet is very low. 
On the other hand, in the constraint space, the 
side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot is 
controlled by force control (2) with F
d  
= K ? d N, where d is 
the penetration depth of the finger into the virtual object and K 
is the stiffness. Here, note that the value of K is arbitrary 
constant if the value of F
d
 becomes high value. By doing this, 
the haptic finger’s tip positions are constrained on the surface 
of the virtual object (namely, the fingertips of the haptic 
fingers do not penetrate the virtual object, and it is possible to 
let the fingertips slide on the surface of the virtual object). 
Further, the softness-display device controls the tension of the 
flexible sheet according to the stiffness of the real soft object. 
Even if a user of the haptic interface pushes the virtual object, 
the fingertips are on the surface of the virtual object, and the 
 
(a) Overall view 
  
(b) Back view (c) The connection to thumb and 
index fingers
Figure 3.  The developed softness-display device. 
 
(a) Overall view (b) Front view
Figure 2.  The mechanical structures of the softness-display device. 
828
  
user can feel the softness by pushing the sheet of the 
softness-display device. That is, the flexible sheet has the same 
softness as the actual object. By using the above control 
methods, softness display at multiple fingers is accomplished. 
For more details of the control system of the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface, please see [18]. 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
To evaluate the developed system, we carried out three 
experiments. 
A. Experiment 1: Measurements of Displayed Softness 
To evaluate the displayable softness of the developed 
device, we measured the relationship between force and 
displacement. Note that this experiment measures the 
displayable softness of the softness-display device; thus, we 
considered the performance of the developed device without 
using the side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface 
robot. 
The measurement system is shown in Fig. 4. It consists of a 
force gauge, a gauge stand with manual height control, and a 
tape measure. The top of the softness-display device was 
connected to the force gauge. A steel sphere with an 8 mm 
diameter was fixed to the aluminum flat bar, and the bar was 
fixed to a base. The measurement procedure is as follows: i) 
the motor of the device is rotated at the desired angle (every 90 
deg from 0 to 360 deg) and we give the tension at the flexible 
sheet of the device. Then the height of the force gauge is 
adjusted so that the surface of the flexible sheet and the surface 
of the steel sphere are in agreement. ii) By using the tape 
measure installed in the stand, we move the height of the sheet 
only the desired distance (every 1 mm from 0 to 7 mm), and 
measure the reaction force to the steel sphere using the force 
gauge. Three readings were averaged to derive the mean. 
The measurement results are shown in Fig. 5. In this figure, 
the vertical and the horizontal axes show the average value of 
the reaction force and the displacement, respectively. Further, 
Rot i for i = 0 to 360 means the rotational angle of the motor. 
From this figure, it turns out that the softness of the flexible 
sheet can be made variable by controlling the sheet’s tension 
(namely, by changing the rotational angle of the motor). 
Further, the relationship between the force and the 
displacement is nonlinear, and we also found that the device 
can display an object of nonlinear softness like a human body. 
For example, the relationship between the force and the 
displacement in the commercially available breast model 
made of silicon becomes as shown in Fig. 8 (b), which is 
mentioned later (for comparison, the response of the 
softness-display device at 270 deg is shown), and we can also 
see that the relationship in the silicon breast model resembles 
the relationship in the developed device. 
B. Experiment 2: Contact Experiment 
We integrated the softness-display device and the 
side-faced-type multi-fingered haptic interface robot, and 
carried out a contact experiment where the user touches a 
virtual soft object in the VR environment. 
In the experiment, a user connected his index finger to the 
device and pushed a virtual soft object several times. Here, 
we did not use the interface arm part of the haptic interface. 
The control method in section III-B was used. To avoid the 
penetration of the finger all the way to the virtual object, we 
set F
d  
= 1 kN/m ? d in (2) for the constraint space case, where 
d is the penetration depth. Further, to adjust the tension of the 
flexible sheet, we set the ?
d
 = 360 deg in (1) for the free space 
case and ?
d
 = 270 deg in (1) for the constraint space case. 
Fig. 6 shows the experimental environment. Fig. 6 (a) 
shows the real environment, and (b) shows the VR 
environment. In this figure, the small sphere corresponds to 
the user’s index fingertip position and the blue cube is the 
virtual soft object. In the experiment, the user connects his 
index finger to the softness-display device, which is 
connected to the haptic index finger, and pushes a virtual soft 
object several times. Here note that we consider only the 
motion in the vertical direction (z-axis), and the user can feel 
the force in the normal direction of the sheet. 
Fig. 7 shows the experimental results. Fig. 7 (a) shows the 
z-axis force response of the haptic index finger, (b) shows the 
Figure 4.  Measurement system of Experiment 1. 
 
(a) Real environment (b) VR environment
Figure 6.  Experimental Environment of Experiment 2. 
Figure 5.  Force and Displacement of the softness-display device. 
829
  
z-axis position response of the index finger, and (c) shows the 
rotational angle of the motor, which pulls the flexible sheet. 
In addition, the gray portions surrounded by the dotted line in 
the figures show the time intervals where the finger contacts 
the virtual object. In the interval where the index finger did 
not contact the virtual object, the angle of the motor 
converged to the desired angle, ? 
d
 = 360 deg (the average 
angular error was 0.02 rad), and we also see that the index 
finger did not penetrate through to the virtual object. Further, 
there were no big changes in the responses of the fingertip 
force (the average force error was 0.06 N) even if the user 
moved his index finger in that case. On the other hand, in the 
intervals where the finger contacts the virtual object, the 
rotational angle of the motor was controlled at 270 deg (the 
average angular error was 0.02 rad), and this derives the 
changing softness at the time of the user pushing on the sheet. 
In this case, there was a big change in the response of the 
fingertip force, but there were no changes in the fingertip 
position. So it is inferred from these facts that the fingertip 
position of the haptic finger is restrained on the object surface 
and the softness display was made by the softness-display 
device. These results showed that integrating the 
softness-display device and the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot can produce a realistic 
softness sensation of the virtual object. 
C. Experiment 3: Comparing the displayed softness and the 
softness of the actual object 
Here, we conducted a psychological test to compare the 
displayed softness and the softness of the actual object. In the 
experiment, the participants touched both the actual object and 
the virtual object constructed in the VR environment, and 
subjectively evaluated the similarity of the touch sensations. 
When the subjects touched the virtual object, we carried out 
two methods: method 1 used the conventional haptic interface 
(previous finger holder) and method 2 used the developed 
softness-display device (newly developed finger holder). 
We measured the relationship between the force and the 
displacement of the breast palpation model (Fig. 8 (a)) using a 
force gauge before the experiment. The measurement result is 
shown in Fig. 8 (b). For the comparison, we show the response 
of the softness-display device at 270 deg in Fig. 5 (the average 
error between the responses of the breast model and the 
softness display device was 0.03 N). The stiffness of the 
model was about K=100 N/m from the experimental results. 
When we display the softness using method 1, the haptic 
finger is controlled using (2) and we set F
d  
= K ? d N, where d 
is the penetration depth. On the other hand, when we display 
the softness using method 2, we set the followings: the 
softness-display device is controlled using (1) and we set ?
 d
 = 
270 deg, and the haptic finger is controlled using (2) and we 
set F
d  
= K
~
? d N, where K
~
 = 1 kN/m. 
In the experiment, the subject touches the actual 
object/virtual object using his index finger as shown in Fig. 8 
(a). Eight people in their twenties participated in this 
experiment and we divided the participants into two groups, A 
and B. (All participants were male and are right-handed.) To 
eliminate any effect caused by the sequence of experiments, 
we set up the order of the method in each group as shown in 
Table II. The participants carried out the experiments in the 
following manner: (1) First the participant touched the actual 
object using his index finger, and memorized the touch 
sensation. Here, note that the place the participant touched was 
where the stiffness of the model was measured. When we 
touch an actual object, the object’s shape is deformed, but the 
(a) Z-axis fingertip force 
(b) Z-axis fingertip position 
(c) Rotational angle of the motor 
Figure 7.  Results of contact experiment. 
(a) Breast model (b) Force and displacement of the 
breast model. 
 
(c) Softness-display device case (d) Finger holder case 
Figure 8.  Experimental Environment of Experiment 3. 
TABLE II. THE SEQUENCE OF METHOD IN EXPERIMEN 3
Order of methods Group A Group B 
1 Method 1 Method 2 
2 Method 2 Method 1 
830
  
virtual object is not visibly changed when it is touched. So, we 
eliminated the sight information of the participant to remove 
the influence of softness perception by visual information. 
Further, in the case of the actual object and the virtual object, 
the participant was instructed to push the object using the 
same speed. (2) the participant touched the virtual object using 
the corresponding method. After the experiment, the 
participant was asked to rate the similarity of the two touch 
sensations on a five-point scale, in which 1 is the lowest rating 
and 5 is highest The order of the presentations varied: for 
example, the participants in group A carried out the 
experiment outlined in steps (1) to (2) using Method 1. After 
30 minutes passed, the participants carried out the experiment 
in steps (1) to (2) using Method 2. 
Fig. 9 shows the results of the questionnaire. In this figure, 
the horizontal axis shows the method, and the vertical axis 
shows the average score. The vertical bar shows the standard 
variation of the corresponding value. A Wilcoxon signed-rank 
test was carried out for methods 1 and 2. The test showed a 
significant difference between the method 1 and method 2 
(Z=?1.99, N=8, p=0.046<0.05). This shows that the proposed 
softness-display device is more effective for softness display 
than the conventional haptic interface (previous finger holder). 
Further, we obtained the following comments from the 
participants: The softness-display system presents the feeling 
which surrounds the finger, and it is similar to the experience 
of touching a real object; the textures at the time of finger 
contact are alike in the softness-display system. On the other 
hand, we obtained the following comments for the 
conventional haptic interface: the participant has a feeling that 
the contact surface is small; there is a feeling of pushing a 
spring. For this reason, the proposed softness-display system 
can display the sensation of softness with high precision 
compared with the conventional haptic interface. Moreover, 
differences in the softness can be perceived more clearly. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we describe a haptic interface for softness 
display at multiple fingertips. To accomplish this aim, we 
developed a softness-display device using a flexible sheet, 
and present the concept of softness display by combining the 
developed softness-display device and the side-faced-type 
multi-fingered haptic interface robot for softness display to 
multiple fingers. In addition, this setting can ensure a large 
workspace and can realize the case where the softness differs 
with each finger. Further, the control method of the 
softness-display system, and the results of an experimental 
evaluation are presented. Through the experiments, we found 
that the proposed system has a remarkable softness display 
performance compared with our earlier method; thus, the 
proposed system can be considered effective for softness 
display at multiple fingers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Hayward, O.R. Astley, M. Cruz-Hernandez, D. Grant, and G. 
Robles-De-La-Torre, “Haptic interfaces and devices,” Sensor Review, 
vol. 24, pp. 16–29, 2004. 
[2] A.EI Saddik, “The Potential of Haptic Technology,” IEEE 
Instrumentation & Measurement Magazine, vol. 10, pp. 10–17, 2007. 
[3] B. Hannaford and A. Okamura, “Haptics,” in Handbook of Robotics, B. 
Siciliano and O. Khatib Eds. New York: Springer, 2008, pp. 719-739. 
[4] S. Katsura, W. Yamanouchi, and Y. Yokokura, “Real-World Haptics,” 
IEEE Industrial Electronics Magazine, vol. 6. pp. 25–31, 2012. 
[5] R. Haluck and T. Krummel, “Computers and Virtual Reality for 
Surgical Education in the 21st Century,” Arch Surg., vol. 135, pp. 
786–792, 2000. 
[6] R. Reznick and H. MacRae, “Teaching Surgical Skills – Change in the 
Wind,” The New England Journal of Medicine, vol. 355, pp. 
2664–2669, 2006. 
[7] F.J. Clark and K.W. Horch, “Chapter 13. Kinesthesia,”  in Handbook 
of Perception and Human Performance Vol. I, K.R. Boff, L. Kaufman, 
and J.P. Thomas, Ed. A Wiley-Interscience Publication, 1986, pp. 
13-1–13-62. 
[8] C.E. Sherrick and R.W. Cholewiak, “Chapter 12. Cutaneous 
Sensitivity,”  in Handbook of Perception and Human Performance Vol. 
I, K.R. Boff, L. Kaufman, and J.P. Thomas, Ed. A Wiley-Interscience 
Publication, 1986, pp. 12-1–12-58. 
[9] M.A. Srinivasan and R.H. LaMotte, “Tactual Discrimination of 
Softness,” J. of Neurophysiology, vol. 73, pp. 88–101, 1995. 
[10] R.M. Friedman, K.D. Hester, B.G. Greenm and R.H. LaMotte, 
“Magnitude estimation of softness,” Exp. Brain Res., vol. 191, pp. 
133–142, 2008. 
[11] W. M. B. Tiest and A. M. L. Kappers, “Cues for Haptic Perception of 
Compliance,” IEEE Trans. on Haptics, vol. 2, pp. 189–199, 2009. 
[12] K. Fujita and Y. Ikeda, “Remote haptic sharing of elastic soft objects,” 
in Proc. of the 1st Joint Eurohaptics Conference and Symposium on 
Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems 
(WHC ’05), poster, 2005. 
[13] E.P. Scilingo, M. Bianchi, G. Grioli, and A. Bicchi, “Rendering 
Softness: Integration of Kinesthetic and Cutaneous Information in a 
Haptic Device,” IEEE Trans. on Haptics, vol. 3, pp. 109–118, 2010. 
[14] S.Y. Kim, K.U. Kyung, J. Park, and D.S. Kwon, “Real-time area-based 
haptic rendering and the augmented tactile display device for a 
palpation simulator,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 21, pp. 961–981, 2007. 
[15] M. Takaiwa and T. Noritsugu, “Development of Breast Palpation 
Simulator Using Pneumatic Parallel Manipulator,” in Proc. of SICE 
Annual Conference 2007, pp. 823–827, 2007. 
[16] K. Inoue, R. Uesugi, R. Sasama, T. Arai, and Y. Mae, “Development of 
Integrated Visual Haptic Display Using Translucent Flexible Sheet,” J. 
of Robotics and Mechatronics, vol. 17, pp. 302–309, 2005. 
[17] H. Iwata, H. Yano, F. Nakaizumi, and R. Kawamura, “Project 
FEELEX: Adding Haptic Surface to Graphics”, in Proc. of SIGGRAPH 
2001, pp. 469–476, 2001. 
[18] T. Endo, H. Aoyama, S. Nakagawa, and H. Kawasaki, “Haptic Display 
by a Side-Faced-Type Multi-Fingered Haptic Interface”, in Proc. of 
10th IFAC Symposium on Robot Control (SYROCO2012), pp. 367–372, 
2012. 
[19] S.J. Lederman and R.L. Klatzky, “Sensing and Displaying Spatially 
Distributed Fingertip Forces in Haptic Interfaces for Teleoperator and 
Virtual Environment Systems,” Presence, vol. 8, pp. 86–103, 1999. 
[20] Exseal Corporation, Hyper-gel sheet (2013). [Online]. Available: 
http://www.exseal.net/ 
[21] T. Endo, H. Kawasaki, T. Mouri, Y. Ishigure, H. Shimomura, M. 
Matsumura, and K. Koketsu, “Five-Fingered Haptic Interface Robot: 
HIRO III,” IEEE Trans. on Haptics, vol. 4, pp. 14–27, 2011. 
 
Figure 9.  Results of questionnaire. 
831
