Design of a tendon-driven robotic hand with an embedded camera
Kazuki Mitsui, Ryuta Ozawa
Abstract— This paper designs a new ﬁve-ﬁngered robotic
hand with a camera. Several morphological features of the
human hand are integrated to improve the appearance of
the hand. The drive system of this hand is under-actuated
to eliminate the weight of the hand and to embed all the
actuators inside the palm. Despite of this under-actuation, this
hand can grasp objects in several different ways. In addition,
the two different transmissions are adopted to drive the ﬁngers
according to their roles. These transmissions help not only to
improve drive efﬁciency but also to secure the space of the
embedded camera.
I. INTRODUCTION
Multi-ﬁngered robotic hands have been developed for the
last few decades to realize dexterous motions that cannot be
realized by a simple gripper. These robotic hands tradition-
ally have more than two ﬁngers and equip with actuators
whose number is almost equivalent to that of the joints. The
actuators of these robotic hands are placed on the forearms
[1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] to assemble the robot hands
in the similar size of the human hand or on the palm at the
sacriﬁce of the size, weight or power [8], [9].
In contrast, under-actuated robotic hands have been de-
veloped to decrease the size and weight of the hands with
the sacriﬁce of the hand functions [10], [11], [12], [13],
[14], [15]. These robotic hands have ﬁngers with soft gripper
mechanisms that adaptively wind around an object using a
small number of actuators [16]. Therefore, the hands can
grasp a variety of objects using one or a few actuators that
are placed on the palm and they are applied for prosthetic
hands and high speed grippers. However, the function of
these robotic hands is limited to at most power grasp and
simple tip grasp.
To build an under-actuated robotic hand, we focus on
three important points; one is to introduce some features
of appearance of the human hand into the shape of the
robotic hand because the appearance of the hand increases
the frequency of usage and the adaptivity of the hand to
object shapes.
The second point is to realize many different grasps with
the hand. Recently, geometric shapes of a hand have been
analyzed to obtain the principal components of static shapes
of the hand called hand synergies [17] and the obtained
components were used to design drive systems of the robotic
hands for power and precision grasps [18] [19]. A prosthetic
hand that can realize lateral grasp was developed, but the
position of the thumb must be manually changed [20]. An
K. Mitsui is with Murata Machinery, Ltd., Aichi, JAPAN
R. Ozawa is with the Department of Robotics, Ritsumeikan University,
Shiga, 525-8577, JAPAN, ryuta@se.ritsumei.ac.jp.
4;:>24>
.0 =5:=;<
68;328
:;:+4;:>24>
-;<45 =5:=;<
124>785 =5:=;<
,295<2
/0-
8;428
Fig. 1. Classiﬁcation of sensors
underactuated robotic hand was designed using a mechanical
selector and an actuator to realize multiple grasps [21].
The mechanical selector was used to manually select the
pattern of the bending ﬁngers. Recently, a controller-based
design approach was proposed to realize multiple grasps
using under-actuated mechanisms such as lateral grasp that
requires the adduction/abduction of the thumb [7]. We will
design a new robotic hand based on this approach.
The last point is to integrate sensors into a robotic hand.
Figure 1 shows a classiﬁcation of sensors used in robotic
hands. Robotic hands frequently equip with ﬁnger-tip force
sensors [10] and tactile sensors [22], [23]. These sensors are
used to observe contact situations for improving the stability
of grasps while some grasping controllers can guarantee the
grasp stability without using these sensors [24].
Infrared ray sensors were used to detect an object in
a short range such as in front of the palm and between
the ﬁngers [25]. A laser range ﬁnder (LRF) for a robotic
hand was developed to recognize a object [26]. This LRF is
smaller than the commercial ones but is still too large to be
embedded inside the palm of a hand because of the size of
lasers. Another candidate to obtain global information is a
camera. Unlike the force and tactile sensors, it is difﬁcult for
grasping controllers to compensate the global information.
Therefore, it is important to integrate these sensors into a
robotic hand. Boivin and Sharf [27] designed a hand with
a camera can detect the object pose based on the database.
However, this robotic hand was designed for the operation on
the space station, thus was relatively easy to secure a place
for a camera.
In this paper, we design a novel tendon-driven robotic hand
with a camera inside the palm. The drive system of this
robotic hand is designed based on a special under-actuated
tendon-driven mechanism [7] that use special cross-coupling
pulleys to connectedly move the joints and only three actu-
ators to reduce the weight of the hand. Nevertheless, this
hand could grasp object in four different conﬁgurations.
However, this hand did not adequately realize morphological
feature of the human hand and could not generate large grasp
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6733
force. Therefore, we integrate several morphological features
of the human hand into the hand. In addition, we design
drive systems of the ﬁngers to be suitable for their control
purposes. These improvements are also useful in obtaining
a space where a camera is embedded.
Section II explains the basic kinematics and functions of
the robotic hand. Section III designs hand arches of the
human hand into the robotic hand as the morphological
features. Section IV designs drive systems of the ﬁngers and
section V describe an embedded camera inside the palm.
II. KINEMATICS AND BASIC FUNCTIONS OF THE ROBOTIC
HAND
Figure 2 shows the kinematic structure of a robotic hand.
The robotic hand has the thumb and four ﬁngers. The thumb
has three joints; the carpometacarpal (CMC), the intercarpal
(IP) and midcarpal (MP) joints. Each joint has one degree of
freedom (DOF). The CMC joint realizes the circumduction
and the joint axis is orthogonal to the axes of the IP and MP
joints for ﬂexion and extension. In contrast, each ﬁnger has
the three parallel joints to realize the ﬂexion and extension.
The link lengths of each ﬁnger are adjusted to be suitable to
the index, middle, ring and little ﬁngers.
This robotic hand is designed based on grasp functions
and can realize the four basic grasps: two-ﬁngered and three-
ﬁngered pinches, power grasps and lateral pinch, as shown
in Fig. 3 [7]. In the initial position of the hand, the thumb is
placed in front of the index ﬁnger. In the power grasp, the
ﬁngers curl up and the IP and MP joints of the thumb bend
toward the ﬁngers. In the two-ﬁngered and three-ﬁngered
precision grasps, the CMC joint needs be inclined at 45
degrees from the initial position. Then, all the ﬁngers move
toward the pinching position and the thumb moves toward
the ﬁngers as the pad of the thumb contacts with those of the
ﬁngers. The difference between the two-ﬁngered and three-
ﬁngered pinches is the motion of the ﬁngers; only the index
ﬁnger moves in the two-ﬁngered pinch and the index and
middle ﬁngers move in the three-ﬁngered pinch. Thus, at
least, the index ﬁnger must move independently from the rest
of the ﬁngers. In the lateral pinch, all the ﬁngers ﬁrst curl
up as the power grasp. Then, the CMC joint of the thumb is
inclined at 90 degrees and the IP and MP joints move as the
pad of the thumb contacts with the side of the index ﬁnger.
Therefore, the hand needs to have four independent DOFs;
one for the index ﬁnger, one for the rest of the ﬁngers and
two for the thumb. The MP and IP joints of the ﬁngers and
the thumb move connectedly and the CMC joint of the thumb
must independently move to some discrete angles from the
MP and IP joints.
The connected motions of distal IP (DIP), proximal IP
(PIP) and MP joints are realized by two pairs of the cross-
coupling tendons, as shown in Fig. 4 (a) [28]. The blue
and red tendons are connected to elastic elements instead of
actuators and constrain the ratio of the joint movements in the
free space. Therefore, the all the joints of the ﬁngers naturally
realizes extension and ﬂexion when the green tendons are
pulled. In addition, the elastic elements of the cross-coupling
Fig. 2. Kinematics of the robotic hand
6>; 7C=A; D< 353 @D?CH D< H>; H>IB8
- :;=, 01 :;=, 2- :;=,
4C?H?7A EDG?H?DC .+<?C=;F;: E?C9>
/+<?C=;F;: E?C9> EDJ;F =F7GE
A7H;F7A E?C9>
Fig. 3. Basic functions of the robotic hand and the CMC joint angles.
tendons absorb the external force when the ﬁnger contacts
with the environment. Thus, the ﬁngers can adaptively grasp
an object.
The thumb also adopted the cross-coupling tendons, thus
the CMC, MP and IP joints move connectedly. However, in
the case of the thumb, the posture of the CMC joint must
be chosen independently from the three discrete postures, as
shown in Fig. 3. To realize this feature, a notch mechanism
is designed, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). This mechanism has a
movable bar (red box) and a gear with notches. The CMC
joint is immobilized by inserting the movable bar into one
of the notches and, then, the IP and MP joints can move
independently of the CMC joint.
III. MORPHOLOGICAL DESIGNS OF THE HAND
In this section, two morphological designs are introduced
to change the shape of the hand. It is well known that
the human hand naturally forms a convex shape when it is
6734
(b)
CMC free CMC locked Initial posture
q3
q2
q1
actuator
(a)
Fig. 4. (a) Cross coupling tendons and (b) notch mechanisms.
relaxed and that the convex shape increases the stability of
the grasping [29]. The convex shape consists of the three
arches; the longitudinal, proximal transverse and distal trans-
verse arches, as shown in Fig. 5. The proximial transverse
arch is realized by the CMC joints of the ﬁngers inside the
palm. However, the designed robotic hand does not have any
CMC joints of the ﬁngers. The longitudinal arch is partially
realized by the cross-coupling structure in Section II, but the
kinematics of the hand is not adequately optimized.
Therefore, in the next subsections, we design the position
of the MP joints of the ﬁnger to introduce the distal trans-
verse arch and to improve the longitudinal arch of the hand.
A. The distal transverse arch of the hand
Based on the observation of the human hand, we realized
the following two points to build the distal transverse arch:
• The peak of the arch is at the middle ﬁngers.
• The position of the MP joint of the index ﬁnger is
shifted to the back from that of the little ﬁnger.
Therefore, we designed this arch, as shown in Fig. 6 (b), to
form more natural arch than the straight alignment of the
MP joints, adopted in the previous design, as shown in Fig.
6 (a) [7].
B. The longitudinal arch of the hand
In the hand design, the joint axes of the DIP, PIP and
MP joints usually lie on the same line to simply Denavit-
Hartenberg convention at the initial position, as shown in
Fig. 7 (left). However, from the anatomical point of views,
the epiphysis of the proximal phalanx is larger than that of
the middle pahalanx, the rotational center of the MP joint is
shifted to the palm of the hand, as shown in Fig. 7 (right).
The positions of the MP joints increase smoothness of the
arch of the hand. The left and right photos in Fig. 8 show
Longitudinal arch
Distal transverse arch
Proximal transverse arch
Fig. 5. Arches in the hand.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6. Morphological arch structure of the hand. (a) The previous design
in [7]. (b) The arch of the developed hand.
the current and previous designs of the hands, respectively.
The surface of the palm side is curved more smoothly than
that of the previous design when the ﬁngers bend.
IV. FINGER DRIVE SYSTEM
As described in Sec. II, we use two actuators to drive all
the four ﬁngers; one actuator is used for only the index ﬁnger
and the other is used for the rest of the three ﬁngers. The
most important motion of the index ﬁnger is the two-ﬁngered
pinch that requires precise torque control rather than large
grasping force. In contrast, the main role of the rest of the
6735
+,.0-/1
Fig. 7. MP joint position of the ﬁngers. (left) conventional straight ﬁnger,
and (right) modiﬁed MP joint position.
(a) (b)
Fig. 8. Comparison of the longitudinal arches of the hands. (a) The old
MP joint and (b) the new MP joint.
ﬁngers is to adaptively grasp an object. Especially, it is well
known that the middle and little ﬁngers play an important
role in generating grasping force. Thus, it is desirable to
increase the efﬁciency of the transmission. Therefore, we
use different transmission for these two drive systems.
Tendon-driven mechanisms are useful in decreasing the
backlash and play in the transmission because they generate
the bias force [30]. The tendon-driven mechanism has a
pair of antagonistic tendons. To eliminate the number of
actuators, one tendon is driven by an actuator and the other
is connected to an elastic element, as shown in Fig. 9
(a). The spring is prolonged when the actuator pulls the
tendon and the driving force is counterbalanced to the elastic
force. Then, the effective actuator torque decreases, and
the maximum grasping force becomes small. Therefore, we
adopt this tendon-driven mechanism for the drive system of
the index ﬁnger.
To avoid the torque loss by the counterbalance, the elastic
elements of the antagonistic tendon must be eliminated,
which requires connecting the antagonistic tendon to an
actuator. However, we would like to avoid introducing an
additional actuator. Therefore, the belt-pulley mechanism is
adopted to drive the ﬁngers, as shown in Fig. 9 (b). This
drive system causes the backlash but can generate larger
torque than the tendon-driven mechanism. At the basements
of the three ﬁngers, the actuator is connected to a drive shaft.
Torsion springs are inserted between the drive shaft and the
drive pulley of each ﬁnger to adaptively absorb the difference
of the ﬁnger motions. Therefore, three elastic elements of
the antagonistic tendons were eliminated from the back of
the hand. Therefore, the three ﬁngers can adaptively grasp
an object using only one actuator. This sharing of the drive
systems is useful not only in the assignment of the proper
drive system but also in securing the space to embed a
camera in the hand. The latter point will be discussed in
the next section.
As shown in Fig. 11, the developed robotic hand can grasp
objects using four different grasps; two-ﬁngered and three-
ﬁngered pinches, power grasp and lateral pinch.
V. VISUAL SENSOR OF THE ROBOTIC HAND
In this section, we describe the process to determine
the camera position. In the two-ﬁngered and three-ﬁngered
pinches and power grasp, an object exists the space in front
of the thumb and the index ﬁnger. Therefore, the camera
should be placed to capture the space in front of the palm
between the CMC joints of the thumb and the MP joint of
the index ﬁnger. As shown in the previous design of Fig.
10 (a), the cylinder connected to the antagonistic tendon of
the index ﬁnger was placed on the back under the index
ﬁnger. However, this is the space that the camera should be
placed. Therefore, the elastic element should be replaced to
some other place. To achieve this replacement, the rotational
passive element in Fig. 10 (b) is designed. In this case,
the antagonistic tendon goes down and turns to the little
ﬁnger using a small idle pulley and connected to a rotational
passive element. Therefore, the space below the index ﬁnger
can be used for embedding a camera. This passive element
contains a drum connected to a torsion spring. Thus, this
drum can absorb the external force when pretension is
adequately added. The pretension can be adjusted by rotating
the adjusting dial. Figure 12 shows the size of the hand and
the camera position. The camera is ﬁxed on the back of
the hand and can observe the motion in front of the hand
through the small window. This camera is 1/4 inch CMOS
color image camera and the resolution is 640 x 480 pixels.
The transmission rate is 30 ﬂames per second. This camera
has the wide angle of view and can capture the thumb,
index ﬁnger and an object between them just before the two-
ﬁngered pinch is established, as shown in Fig. 13.
The weight of the hand including the actuators and the
camera is about 450 grams and the length is about 190 mm,
which are almost the same as those of a commercial product
[20].
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we designed a robotic hand with a camera to
observe an object in front of the palm. This robotic hand was
designed based on the under-actuated tendon-driven robotic
6736
*
0
*
/
*
.
*
0
*
/
*
.
19<27:98;<84
<695:9
,2- ,3-
Fig. 9. Two different drive systems of the ﬁnger. (a) A tendon-driven
mechanism for the index ﬁnger, and (b) a belt-pulley drive system for the
middle, ring and little ﬁngers.
(a)
extensor tendon
adjust dial (screw bolt)
extensor spring
spring stopper
cylinder
(b)
extensor tendon
reel-up pulley
adjusting dial
Fig. 10. Back structures of the hands. (a) The mechanism used in [7], and
(b) The developed mechanism.
hand [7]. The distal transverse and longitudinal arch struc-
tures were adopted to improve the appearance of the hand.
The drive systems of the ﬁngers were functionally modiﬁed
to take the roles of the ﬁngers into account. The tendon-
driven mechanism is suitable for precise torque control
while reduces maximum torque. Therefore, this mechanism
is suitable for controlling the index ﬁnger that is mainly used
for precision grasp. In contrast, the belt-pulley mechanism
Fig. 11. Four grasps using a developed hand. (top left) two-ﬁngered pinch,
(top right) three-ﬁngered pinch, (bottom left) power grasp and (bottom right)
lateral pinch.
generates larger maximum torque while this mechanism
is not suitable for precise motion control. Therefore, this
mechanism is suitable for controlling the rest of the ﬁngers
that are mainly used for power grasp. This mechanism also
helped to secure the space for embedding the camera inside
the palm because it eliminated the springs for antagonistic
tendons. We conﬁrmed that the camera could observe an
object in front of the palm, where the index ﬁnger and the
thumb can pinch an object. The camera could be blind when
the hand grasp a dirt object with the palm. Therefore, we
will secure the basic grasping functions independent of the
camera and basically use it to support the functions, e.g., by
determining the moment where the hand starts grasping. It
might be difﬁcult to detect the distance between the palm
and an object using only single camera. Thus, we will also
add other sensors such as proximal sensors in addition to the
camera.
We will develop a system for object recognition to deter-
mine the moment of grasps using the embedded camera.
REFERENCES
[1] S. C. Jacobsen, J. E. Wood, D. F. Knutti, and K. B. Biggers. The
UTAH/M.I.T. dexterous hand: Work in progress. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, V ol. 3, No. 4, pp. 21–50, 1984.
[2] M. T. Mason and J. K. Salisbury. Robot Hands and the Mechanics of
Manipulation. The MIT Press, 1985.
6737
camera
Fig. 12. Comparison of the developed hand with a camera and human
hand
Fig. 13. The camera view inside the palm of the hand.
[3] H. Kobayashi. On the articulated hands. In The Robotics Research:
The second International Symposium, pp. 293–300. The MIT Press,
1985.
[4] J. Butterfaß, M. Grebenstein, H. Liu, and G. Hirzinger. Dlr-hand ii:
Next generation of a dexterous robot hand. In Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation, pp. 109–114, 2001.
[5] M. Grebenstein, M. Chalon, G. Hirzinger, and R. Siegwart. Antago-
nistically driven ﬁnger design for the anthropomorphic DLR hand arm
system. In Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
pp. 609–616, Taipei, Taiwan, Oct. 2010.
[6] M. C. Carrozza, G. Cappiello, S. Micera, B. B. Edin, L. Beccai, and
C. Cipriani. Design of a cybernetic hand for perception and action.
Biological Cybernetics, V ol. 95, pp. 629–644, 2006.
[7] K. Mitsui and R. Ozawa. An under-actuated robotic hand for multiple
grasps. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Tokyo, Japan,
Nov. 2013.
[8] H. Kawasaki, T. Komatsu, and K. Uchiyama. Dexterous anthro-
pomorphic robot hand with distributed tactile sensor: Gifu hand II.
IEEE/ASME Trans. on Mechatronics, V ol. 7, No. 3, pp. 296–303, 2002.
[9] J.-H. Bae, S.-W. Park, J.-H. Park, M.-H. Baeg, D. Kim, and S.-R. Oh.
Development of a low cost anthropomorphic robot hand with high
capability. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., Algarve,
Portugal, Oct 2012.
[10] H. Liu, J. Butterfass, S. Knoch, P. Meusel, and G. Hirzinger. A
new control strategy for DLR’s multisensory articulated hand. IEEE
Control. Syst. Mag., V ol. 15, pp. 105–110, 1999.
[11] M. C. Carrozza. The SPRING hand: Development of a self-adaptive
prosthesis for restoring natural grasping. Autonomous Robots, V ol. 16,
pp. 125–141, 2004.
[12] F. Lotti, P. Tiezzi, G. Vassura, L. Biagiotti, G. Palli, and C. Melchiorri.
Development of UB hand 3: Early results. In Proc. of IEEE Inter. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4488–4493, Barcelona, Spain, April
2005.
[13] K. Kaneko, K. Harada, and F. Kanehiro. Development of multi-
ﬁngered hand for life-size humanoid robots. In Proc. of IEEE Inter.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 913–920, Roma, Italy, April
2007.
[14] N. Fukaya, S. Toyama, T. Asfour, and R. Dillmann. Design of the
TUAT/Karlsruhe humanoid hand. In Proc. of the 2000 IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1754–1759, 2000.
[15] L. Birglen, T. Laliberte, and C. Gosselin. Underactuated Robotic
Hands, V ol. 40 of Springer tracts in advance robotics. Springer, Berlin,
2008.
[16] S. Hirose and Y . Umetani. The development of soft gripper for the
versatile robot hand. Mechanism and Machine Theory, V ol. 13, pp.
351–359, 1978.
[17] M. Santello, M. Flanders, and J. F. Soechting. Postural hand synergies
for tool use. The J. of Neuroscience, V ol. 18, No. 23, pp. 1005–10115,
1998.
[18] C. Y . Brown and H. H. Asada. Inter-ﬁnger coordination and postural
synergies in robot hands via mechanical implementation of principal
components analysis. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst.,
pp. 2877–2882, San Diego, CA, Oct. 2007.
[19] G. Grioli, M. Catalano, E. Silvestro, S. Tono, and A. Bicchi. Adaptive
synergies: an approach to the design of under-actuated robotic hands.
In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., pp. 1251–1256,
Vilamoura, Portugal, Oct. 2012.
[20] i-limb ultra Service and ﬁtting Man-
ual. http://www.touchbionics.com/media/48359/i-
limb ultra service and ﬁtting manual.pdf accessed on March 5,
2013.
[21] M. Baril, T. Laliberte, C. Gosselin, and F. Routhier. On the design of
a mechanically programmable underactuated anthropomorphic pros-
thetic gripper. J. Mech. Des., V ol. 135, No. 12, 2013.
[22] H. Maekawa, K. Tanie, K. Komoriya, Kaneko. M., C. Horiguchi, and
T. Sugawara. Development of a ﬁnger-shaped tactile sensor and its
avaluation by active touch. In Proc. of IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Automation, pp. 1327–1334, 1992.
[23] M. Shimojo, A. Namiki, M. Ishikawa, R. Makino, and K. Mabuchi. A
tactile sensor sheet using pressure conductive rubber with electrical-
wires stitched method. IEEE trans. Sensors, V ol. 5, No. 4, pp. 589–
594, 2004.
[24] R. Ozawa, S. Arimoto, S. Nakamura, and J.-H. Bae. Control of an
object with parallel surfaces by a pair of ﬁnger robots without object
sensing. IEEE Trans. on Robotics, V ol. 21, No. 5, pp. 965–976, 2005.
[25] H. Hasegawa, Y . Mizoguchi, K. Tadakuma, A. Ming, M. Ishikawa, and
M. Shimojo. Development of intelligent robot hand using proximity,
contact and slip sensing. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., pp.
777–785, Anchorage, AK, May 2010.
[26] K. Iwasaki, K. Terabayashi, and K. Umeda. Construction of a compact
range image sensor using a multi-slit laser projector suitable for a robot
hand. In Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., pp. 4517–4523,
Vilamoura, Portugal, Oct. 2012.
[27] E. Boivin and I. Sharf. Optimum grasp planner and vision-guided
grasping using a three-ﬁnger hand. Industrial Robot, V ol. 32, No. 1,
pp. 35–42, 2005.
[28] R. Ozawa, K. Hashirii, and H. Kobayashi. Design and control of
underactuated tendon-driven mechanisms. In Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., pp. 1522–1527, Kobe, JAPAN, 5 2009.
[29] D. A. Neumann. Kinesiology of the musculoskletal system. Mosby,
St. Louis, Missouri, 2002.
[30] H. Kobayashi, K. Hyodo, and D. Ogane. On tendon-driven robotic
mechanisms with redundant tendons. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, V ol. 17, No. 5, pp. 561–571, May 1998.
6738
