  
was loaded to a pipette. Small portions of the fiber 
suspension were injected on the sample holder from the 
pipette. Thus, the number and the orientation of the fibers on 
the holder were random. Zoom and focus were set so that the 
entire PDMS ring and the fibers inside were seen sharp in the 
images. Exposure time was adjusted for each illumination 
type. The images were taken in normal laboratory conditions. 
The parts of the images presenting features inside the 
PDMS ring were thresholded using the Otsu’s method and a 
fixed threshold. The images were visually inspected and the 
parameters n
fibers
, n
binaryfibers
 and n
broken 
were counted manually 
and the detection ratio and the cracking ratio for each image 
were calculated as discussed in Section II B. Table 1 presents 
the used thresholds and the results and Fig. 4 shows sample 
images from each illumination type and the corresponding 
binary images thresholded by using Otsu’s method and the 
fixed threshold. 
TABLE I.   ILLUMINATION TEST RESULTS 
Illumination  r det r break T 
 
n fibers 
Type Otsu Man. Otsu Man. Otsu Man.   
Dark field 0.16 0.63 0.56 0.61 28 – 66 31 276 
Ring light 0.74 0.85 0.41 0.40 43 – 46 38 328 
Polarized 0.79 0.98 0.30 0.16 46 –115 51 313 
 
Table 1 shows that the fixed threshold gives significantly 
better results with all the illumination techniques. The 
changes in the width and the twist of the fibers alter the 
amount of light reflected from the fiber to the camera, and 
thus cause changes in the gray level inside the fiber area in 
the images. Otsu’s method often classifies these darker 
sections of the fibers as background. This is seen as 
commonly higher thresholds compared with the fixed values. 
However, the ranking between the performances of the 
illumination methods is the same with both of the 
thresholding methods.  
The polarizer – analyzer configuration was superior to the 
other methods yielding clearly the highest detection ratios 
and the lowest breakage ratios. The results are excellent 
especially with the fixed thresholds. The ring light worked 
moderately but caused sometimes disturbing reflections from 
the substrate, and the contrast between the darkest sections of 
the fibers and the substrate was often too low. The operation 
of the dark light configuration was intolerable. Orientation of 
the fibers to the light sources affected the results but even the 
fibers perpendicular to the direction of light were poorly 
visible in the images. Clearly, the fibers were too transparent 
for this illumination type to work properly. 
Scratches on the substrate might be detected as fibers as 
all of the illumination schemes are efficient in detecting 
unevenness. However, the microscope glass is a cheap and 
replaceable component, which does not damage easily in 
normal use. Thus, replacing the glass belongs to maintenance 
of the system, and analyzing the probabilities of this kind of 
false positives was excluded from the tests.   
Since none of the illumination types studied was easily 
implementable to the microrobotic platform, the decision on 
the illumination method was made solely based on the 
performance. Thus, the polarizer – analyzer setup was 
implemented. 
IV. IMPLEMENTING FINAL ILLUMINATION 
Implementation of the polarizer – analyzer in the 
microrobotic test bench is challenging since it has to be 
integrated to the sample stage. However, the advantage is that 
the microgrippers cannot block the illumination unless they 
block also the view to the fiber samples.  Integrating the light 
source and the polarizer into a sample stage, which is subject 
to rotation, is a challenging task for two reasons. First, the 
wiring of the backlight should not get twisted, and second, 
the angle of the polarizer should remain unchanged as the 
stage rotates. This requires using a stationary structure inside 
the rotating sample stage. Moreover, adding the light source, 
diffuser and polarizer on the rotary stage increases its height 
significantly. This makes moving samples from the rotary 
table to other locations on the xy stage, on which the force 
sensor and such components are attached, difficult due to the 
movement range of the grippers.  
These problems were solved by using a three-level frame 
design and utilizing a hollow shaft of the rotary table. The 
bottom level serves as the attachment plate to the xy table 
and the anchor for the illumination system that should not 
rotate. The middle level is for attaching the rotary table, and 
the top level serves as the working plane. The light source, 
the diffuser and the polarizer are attached on a rod mounted 
on the bottom level and going through the middle level and 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Different thresholding results. Intact fiber (B), broken fiber 
(D), and lost fiber (F). Original images (A, C, E), and thresholded 
binary images (B, D, F). 
5857
  
 
 
Figure 4. Images of wet fibers taken with different illumination (A – C) and binary images provided by Otsu’s method (D – F) and the fixed threshold 
(G – I). Dark field (A, D, G), ring light (B, E, H) and polarizer – analyzer (C, F, I).  
 
 
the hollow shaft of the rotary table. The wires of the light 
source are inside the rod. A hollow cylinder is used to 
transmit motion from the rotary table to the sample stage on 
the working plane. The cylinder is attached to the rotary 
table, and the uppermost section of the rod including the 
illumination system is placed inside. The top of the cylinder 
is removable and has a hole, on which a circular sample 
holder made of glass is mounted. A ring-shaped plastic 
sticker is utilized in creating the shallow pool needed for the 
fibers in suspension. The top level of the design has a hole for 
the cylinder and threads for attaching the force sensor. The 
parts were made of aluminum and the inner parts of the 
cylinder were made matte black to prevent reflections. The 
diffuser and the polarizer were attached on a black 
polyethylene tube surrounding the light source. Fig. 5 shows 
the design of the illumination system, and Fig. 6 presents the 
final implementation.  
The performance of the final system was measured by 
using the same strategy as earlier. Totally 258 fibers were 
imaged and only a fixed threshold was utilized as it was 
found to be a better method. Table 2 presents the results. As 
it can be seen, the performance remained excellent. 
 
TABLE II.   PERFORMANCE OF THE FINAL DESIGN 
r det r break n fibers 
0.99 0.10 258 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. The final design of the polarizer system. The whole design 
(A), the cylinder removed (B). 1 – sample holder, 2 – cylinder, 3 – rod, 
4 – xy table, 5 – polarizer, 6 – diffuser, 7 – light source and 8 – rotary 
table. 
5858
