An In-pipe Robot with Underactuated Parallelogram Crawler Modules
Atsushi Kakogawa
1
, Shugen Ma
2
, and Shigeo Hirose
3
Abstract—In this paper, we present a new in-pipe robot with
independent underactuated parallelogram crawler modules,
which can automatically overcome inner obstacles in the pipes.
The parallelogram crawler modules are adopted to maintain
the anterior-posterior symmetry of forward and backward
movements, and a simple differential mechanism based on
a pair of spur gears is installed to provide underactuated
mechanisms. A central base unit connects each crawler module
through foldable pantograph mechanisms. To verify the basic
behavior of this robot, primary experiments in pipes with
different diameters and at partial steps were conducted.
I. INTRODUCTION
Most towns and cities depend on pipelines and their
extension to further transport energy resources. While a long
time has passed since people began using pipelines, their
inspections became a high priority for maintaining the in-
frastructures, because careful and extensive work is required
to check every point in a very broad area. To overcome
this time-consuming task, robotic pipeline inspections have
been proposed, and various types of in-pipe robots have
been developed. Among them, the wheel-type is mostly
used for traveling through the pipes thanks to its speed and
adaptability to circumstances.
Among the wheel-typein-piperobots,we have focused on
the screw drivemechanismand its functionalitiesin bentand
T-branched pipes because this model has the advantage of
downsizing [1] [2]. For example, the screw drive mechanism
requires only rotational motion with one degree of freedom
andtherotationalaxisoftherotatorcoincideswith thecenter
axisofthepipe.Therefore,nodrivingsystems,such asapair
of bevelgears, are required to changethe rotationaldirection
oftheactuator.Ourproposedscrewdrivein-piperobotwitha
pathway selection mechanism can negotiate both bent pipes
and T-branches with only a driving actuator and a single
steering actuator [2].
On the other hand, in-pipe robots with three independent
driving modules have been reported to be reliable robots
for the past few years [3] [4] [5] [6]. They have several
differences compared to the screw drive mechanism. Firstly,
when passing through T-branches, the screw drive in-pipe
robot needs an additional active joint for bending its body.
In contrast, the in-pipe robot with three driving modules
can steer in the T-branches by only adjusting the speed of
1
A. Kakogawa is with Department of Robotics, Ritsumeikan University,
Eastwing Building, 1-1-1 Noji Higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan.
2
S. Ma is with Department of Robotics, Ritsumeikan University, East-
wing Building, 1-1-1 Noji Higashi, Kusatsu, Shiga, Japan. He is also with
School of Electrical Engineering & Automation, Tianjin University, China.
shugen@se.ritsumei.ac.jp
3
S. Hirose is with HiBot Corp., 2-18-3, Shimomeguro, Meguro-ku,
Tokyo, Japan. hirose@hibot.co.jp
each module, just like the counter rotation of the construc-
tion machines and tanks. These two steering methods are
classiﬁed into two types: an articulated active joint and a
differential-drive type, respectively [3] [4]. Although both
methods are valid for forward travel, they behave differently
in case of backward motion because the screw drive type
has an anterior-posterior asymmetry. Even though the front
rotator of the screw drive in-pipe robot can enter in the next
desired pathway in the T-branch and pull the rear stator
unit, it cannot push the rear unit during backward travel
due to the lack of contact between the rotator and the inner
surface of the T-branch (Fig. 1). The in-pipe robotwith three
driving modules, however, has the same performance even
when traveling backward because of the anterior-posterior
symmetry.
Lack of
Contact
(a) Forward Movement (b) Backward Movement
Fig. 1. Forward/backward mobility of a screw drive mechanism
Moreover, the wheels of the in-pipe robot with three
driving modules are suitable for both straight and bent pipes,
while the front wheels of the screw drive type sweep across
the pipes and they are evenly in contact with the inner
surface. Thus, the path trajectory of the wheels becomes
longer even if the linear travel distance of the robot is short.
Consequently, the contact with inner obstacles (contamina-
tion and corrosion) increases. From the above consideration,
we know that the screw drive type is effective only for
smaller and relatively cleaner pipeline systems without any
branch.
The inspections using the three independent driving mod-
ules might be feasible for severe conditions including con-
tamination, bent pipes, branch pipes, and diameter change;
however, the strategy to overcome these challenges has not
been perfectly completed yet. For example, most of the
three driving modules are passively pushed by pantographs
and springs to maintain contact with the inner wall of the
pipe. When the robot encounters obstacles and steps of the
joints between pipes, it requires a large amount power to
contract the diameter, i.e., to overcome the expanding force
of the springs. To extend the range of the adaptive diameter,
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1687
additionalactivearmshavebeen proposed[6].Moreover,the
speed of each driving module should be properly controlled
when traveling through bent pipes. Therefore, a control
method based on geometric and kinematic analysis has been
adopted [3] [5]. In a previous study, a clutch-based selective
drive mechanism that can switch active and passive wheels
on each modulehasbeen proposed[4].In addition,a method
using angle sensors to detect the attitude of each module has
been introduced [6]. This robot can pass through bent pipes
by keeping the attitude of each module constant; thus, it
requires no geometric and kinematic analysis.
However, the increase in the number of actuators and
sensorsleadsto an increasein thesize,weight,andoperation
difﬁculty of the robot. Therefore, we propose a new in-
pipe robot with three underactuated parallelogram crawler
modules (Fig. 2). Table I shows the speciﬁcations of the
proposed robot. It can automatically adapt to the diameter
change and inner obstacles without any additional active
arms. Here, we describe the design of the new robot and
present the primary experimental result that the robot passed
through a stepped straight pipe.
Fig. 2. A mechanical model of the developed in-pipe robot with underac-
tuated parallelogram crawler modules
TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE ROBOT
Adaptive Diameter [mm] ?136 - ?226
Axial Length [mm] 235
Total Weight [kg] 1.8
Maximum Speed [m/s] 0.23
Rated Torque of the Geared Motor [Nm] 0.332
II. MECHANISM
The newly developed in-pipe robot consists of three un-
deractuated parallelogram crawler modules that are radially
connected with an interval of 120
?
. Each underactuated
parallelogram crawler module consists of an underactuated
parallelogram mechanism and a foldable mechanism. We
used the parallelogram for two reasons. First, the length of
the belt is constant even when the crawler’s shape is trans-
forming; thus, the robot requires no additional mechanism
to adjust the belt length. Secondly, the anterior-posterior
symmetric transformation can be easily realized as depicted
in Fig. 3. Consequently, a functionality similar to forward
movement can be achieved while retrieving the robot. This
function is useful for in-pipe robots that cannot turn 180
?
.
(a) Forward Movement (b) Backward Movement
Fig. 3. Similar mobility for anterior-posterior symmetric transformation
Fig. 4 shows the cross-sectional view of the CAD model
of an underactuated parallelogram crawle. A single-geared
motor is mounted outside of the crawler module because of
the limited space. The inputtorquefrom the motorgives two
outputsthroughthe bevelgears and a differentialmechanism
located at the front arm. The front and rear arms are bound
by a timing belt and the two rotational axes are connected
by an additional narrow belt for their synchronization. Each
function of these differential and synchronization belt is
explained below.
Driving Pulley
Bearing
Tracked Belt
Synchronization Belt
Tensioner
Tensioner
Body Frame
Pulley
Rear Arm
Idler
Miter Gears
Potentiometer
Encoder
Geared Motor
Bevel Gears
Differential Mechanism
Front Arm
Fig. 4. A CAD model of an underactuated parallelogram crawler module
1688
A. A Pair of Spur Gears Realize the Differential Motion
Generally,underactuatedcrawlerrobotsneed a differential
mechanismand reducerswith high gear reduction ratio, such
as planetary gear reducers, for lifting the arms and the entire
body [7] [8]. However, they cannot be equipped in in-pipe
robots because of the limited size of the pipes. A simple
differential mechanism with only a pair of spur gears was
introduced to solve this problem [9]. As shown in Fig. 5
(a), the input force from the motor is transmitted to the
front pulley via a set of spur gears for normal driving mode.
During this mode, the front and rear arms are laid down
becauseofthegravityandthespringforceofthepantograph,
thus preventing the rotation of the arms. In an open ﬁeld,
the crawler with undeformable polygonal shape has been
often used for its high mobility; however, it is not suitable
for a pipe with limited space because of its height. Our
transformable crawler returns to a ﬂat shape by itself by
shortening its contractive diameter.
Input from the Motor Output 1 
Propelling Force
35mm
(a) Driving mode
Output 2 
Fixed
Vertical Force Propelling Force
65mm
(b) Parallelogram mode (arm-lifting)
Fig. 5. The two modes of the differential mechanism
Furthermore, in the parallelogram mode presented in Fig.
5 (b), the forward motion is constrained; consequently, the
input gear starts to lift the arm to 65 mm and compress the
pantograph. Simultaneously, a vertical force as indicated in
Fig. 5 (b) also acts on the contact point between the forepart
and obstacles. This is the most important characteristic for
selecting a differential mechanism. In other words, gears for
the high reduction ratio can be avoided if rotationaldirection
of the arm generated by the vertical propelling force of the
pulley coincides with that of the arm axis (second output).
In Fig. 6, the teeth numbers of the bevel gears and spur
gears are denoted as i
1
, i
2
, i
3
, and i
4
, respectively.
Each gear ratio is set as i
1
: i
2
= 1 : 2, i
3
: i
4
= 1.6 : 1.
Generally,theoutputratio forthearm-liftingshouldbemuch
higher than that for normal driving. In the parallelogram
mode,themotorpoweris transmittedtorotatethewholearm
without reduction. Therefore, the speed of the front pulley
is increased using a smaller gear than that of the arm axis.
Torque driving the front pulley ?
p
and that of the arm ?
a
can
i
1
i
2
i
3
i
4
i
1
i
2
(a) First output for driving (b) Second output for arm-lifting
Fig. 6. Power transmission ﬂow
be thus calculated by
?
p
=
i
4
i
2
i
3
i
1
?
m
(1)
?
a
=
i
2
i
1
?
m
, (2)
where ?
m
is the rated torque of the geared motor. Finally,
?
p
= 0.415 Nm and ?
a
= 0.664 Nm are derived.
Moreover, this underactuated crawler can absorb impacts
from the unexpected external forces but not from breaking
down the motors [7]. It also has the ability to absorb the in-
ternal force generated between misaligned crawler modules.
B. Synchronization between Front Arm and Rear Arm
The belt might be loose if the front and rear arms are not
linked because the perimeter traced by the four pulleys is
shorter than that of the belt. This problem can be avoided
by a parallel link mechanism. However, the arms need to be
raised fromthe singularpointand,therefore,the shapeofthe
crawler may not become a parallelogram [10]. To avoid this
dead point, a timing belt is utilized to directly rotate both
axes of the front and rear arms as depicted in Fig. 6 (b). The
angle of the lifting arm can be detected by a potentiometer
mounted on the axis of the rear arm.
Moreover, in the parallelogram mode, if the front pulley
is constantly locked by the friction, the arms continuously
rotate to the backward direction. To prevent this, stopper
pins are ﬁxed to prevent the arms from lifting more than
30
?
(Fig. 7). After the rotational angle of the arm reaches
30
?
, the crawler starts to drive with transformation.
30
? Stopper Pin
Stopper Pin
Fig. 7. Stopper pins used to limit the arm rotational angle of the arm
1689
C. Foldable Mechanism
To change the adaptive diameter, each crawler module is
connected to a central base unit through passive pantograph
mechanisms (Fig. 8). Each pantograph is radially assembled
with an intervalof 120
?
. A slider movesalong the horizontal
shaft that is passively pushed by a 0.3 N/mm spring. As
previously mentioned, the spring force and gravity push the
armdownwhilein drivingmode.Theend ofthelinkis set at
the middle part of the crawler (Joint A and B) because there
is no space elsewhere due to the presence of the front and
rear arms. Due to their geometric nature, Joints A and B can
only move vertically. Hence in theory, the crawler module
cannot have a relative angle to the central base unit because
the distance between Joint A and B is constant.
Linear Slider Shaft
Spring
Central Base Unit
Linkage
Joint A Joint B
Fig. 8. A pantograph mechanism used to change the diameter of the robot
However, as depicted in Fig. 9 the positions of these two
joints can move independently because each linkage has a
certain axial interspace [3]. Without this effect, the crawler
is kept parallel to the pipe even when transforming, which
is not feasible for adaptive movement.
Fig. 9. Uneven posture eventually generated
When the pantograph is compressed to the limit, the
transforming tracked belt might touch the central base unit.
Here, to smoothly drive the belt, free guide rollers are
attached (Fig. 10).
Guide Roller
Fig. 10. Guide roller to guarantee smooth motion of the belt
D. Adaptive Diameter of Pipes
Diameter of the proposed in-pipe robot depends on two
factors: contractile range of the foldable mechanism and
height of the parallelogram crawler modules. When the
crawler module does not transform its shape (normal driving
mode), and the foldable mechanism is most contracted, the
adaptive diameter of the robot becomes minimum (Fig. 11
(a)). In contrast, when the foldable mechanism is most
expandedby the spring,the robotcannotenlargeits diameter
any more (Fig. 11 (b)). The contractile range of the foldable
mechanism is dependent on the length of the linkage and
solid length of the spring. From this state, the diameter
of the robot can be further extended through the use of
the shape-transformingfunctionof the parallelogramcrawler
(Fig. 11 (d)). Lower crawler modules can touch the inner
wallofthepipeduetothegravityandgeneratethepropulsive
force in horizontal pipes even if the diameter of the pipe is
largerthan that of the robot.However,this function becomes
effective in vertical pipes where the conventional in-pipe
robots cannot reach the inner wall of the pipe. Fig. 11
(c) shows the limitation that the parallelogram crawler can
completely transform its shape. This height of parallelogram
crawler module is dependent on length of the front arm and
position of the stopper pins.
68 mm
101 mm
(a) Most contracted state in nor-
mal driving mode
(b)Mostextended state innormal
driving mode
85 mm
113 mm
(c) Most contracted state in par-
allelogram mode
(d) Most extended state in paral-
lelogram mode
Fig. 11. Adaptive Diameter of Pipes
III. EXPERIMENTAL TEST
To verify the fundamental capability of the new in-pipe
robotwithunderactuatedparallelogramcrawlermodules,two
1690
experimentswereconducted.Inbothcases,aconstantsupply
of 12 V is provided to the three motors in parallel.
A. Experimental Test in a Connected Pipes with Large
Diameter Change
Fig. 12 shows the ﬁrst experimental setup used to test
the mobility of the robot when the pipes undergo large
diameter changes. Two vinyl chloride pipes of ?202 mm
(transparent) and ?154 mm in diameter are joined by a
circular truncated cone-like pipe called an increaser. This
increaser is standardized as “AS-12” by Japan PVC Pipe
and Fittings Association. The diameter difference is about
48 mm, thus, each crawler module needs to be contracted
by 24 mm. The distance and height of the constricted part
are 50 mm and 28 mm,respectively.Thus,thegradientangle
is approximately 30
?
. The robot is inserted from the side of
the larger pipe (?202 mm).
?154 mm
?202 mm
50 mm
28 mm
Increaser
Fig. 12. Experimental setup of different pipes
ThesequencesshowninFig.13showthatourproposedin-
pipe robot negotiates the constricted pipe. Initially, all arms
are pressed to the inner wall of the pipe. When the crawler
collides against the diameter change in sequence 2, it begins
to transform. In sequence 3, the transformation amount of
the lower crawler module is small because the two upper
crawler modules overlie it. From sequence 4 to 6, the robot
takes an uneven posture similar to that of Fig. 9, and then it
goes into the smaller pipe.
B. Experimental Test in a Pipe with a Partial Step
For the second experiment, a straight pipe with an inner
rubberstep was prepared as shown in Fig. 14. It corresponds
to the condition that the inner surface of the pipe is partially
deformed or contaminated, because the friction between the
tracked belt and the rubbersheet is approximately0.8,which
is twice as much as that between the belt and the inner wall
of the vinyl chloride pipe. The maximum height of this step
is 35 mm.
Fig. 15 shows the experimental sequences in a straight
pipe with a partial step. While the robot is climbing a step,
the lower crawler module does not transform but the two
upper arms are lifted up. This is because if any one of
the three modules motion is prevented, the others are also
restricted by the linked central base. As a result, the motor’s
1 2 3
4 5 6
7 8 9
Fig. 13. Experimental sequence of diameter change
35 mm
A Rubber Step
Fig. 14. Experimental setup for a partial step
power is transmitted to the arm-lifting action. Therefore,
transformation is feasible even if the friction does not act
on to the crawler.
C. Comparison with the In-pipe Robot without Parallelo-
gram Mode
To compare the mobilities between the robots with paral-
lelogram mode and without it, an additional experiment is
conductedby addinga hookto restrictthearm-liftingmotion
as shown in Fig. 16.
The experiment showed that each crawler module can
reach the next smaller pipe by the aforementioned effect in
Fig. 9. However, it cannot move forward any more from
this state because the side parts of the crawler modules
(motor and synchronization belt) contact with the edge of
the step. We know from this result that shape-transforming
of the parallelogram crawler enhances the mobility in a
stepped pipe. However, this problem may be also solved
by only using thick grouser. This point should be discussed
by combining with the contractile range of the foldable
mechanism in the future. If the height of the crawler gets
largers, the adaptive diameter of the in-pipe robot becomes
1691
1 2 3
4 5 6
Fig. 15. Experimental sequence in a straight pipe with a partial step
Hook
Fig. 16. Hook to restrict the arm-lifting motion
smaller.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
Here, we have presented a newly developed in-pipe robot
with underactuated parallelogram crawlers along with the
validation of its features. The main features of the developed
in-pipe robot are as follows:
• Needlessnessofthebelt-perimeteradjustingmechanism
• Anterior-posterior symmetric transformation of the par-
allelogram
• Differential mechanism providing two outputs for driv-
ing and climbing movement through a single actuator
• Expansionof the contractiblediameterrangeby switch-
ing the parallelogram and ﬂat crawlers
• Impact absorption of the underactuated mechanism
However, this is only the ﬁrst stage of the project and
additional work is required in the future. First, the feedback
control has not been discussed yet. To make the robot pass
through bent and branch pipes, speed control should be
conducted.
Furthermore, identical power is distributed to the three
motors, sometimes causing misalignment (Fig. 17), espe-
cially after overcoming obstacles. One of the reasons is
the gravity, because the lower modules support the upper
modules. As a result, the position of the central base unit
lowers. This phenomenon can be solved by controlling each
module separately. By taking advantage of the different
speeds among the three modules, the posture of the body
can be aligned.
Fig. 17. Misaligned crawler modules
In addition, wire management and waterprooﬁng should
be considered to achieve a more practical use. In-pipe
robots need to be tethered to supply power and signals,
because battery and wireless communication are not reliable
in underground pipes or iron pipes. However, wire might
hook the corner of the bent and branch pipes. To solve this
problem, whole stem drive [11] or additional driving units
should be adopted. Also, current design of the parallelogram
crawler is not waterproofed. Both side of the parallelogram
crawler module (motor, potentiometer, and synchronization
belt) should be covered to protect from water and dust.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Kakogawa and S. Ma, Stiffness Design of Springs for a Screw
Drive In-pipeRobottoPassthroughCurved PipesandVertical Straight
Pipes, Int. J. Advanced Robotics, vol. 26, no. 3/4, 2012, pp. 253-276.
[2] T. Nishimura, A.Kakogawa and S.Ma, Pathway Selection Mechanism
of a Screw Drive In-Pipe Robot in T-Branches, in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Automation Science and Engineering, Seoul, Korea, 2012, pp.
612-617.
[3] S. Roh and H. R. Choi, Differential-drive In-pipe Robot for Moving
inside Urban Gas Pipelines, IEEE Trans. Robotics, vol. 21, no. 1,
2005, pp 1-17.
[4] S. Roh, D. W. Kim, J. Lee, H. Moon, and H. R. Choi. In-pipe Robot
Based on Selective Drive Mechanism, Int. J. Control, Automation, and
Systems, vol. 7, no. 1, 2009, pp. 105-112.
[5] Y. S. Kwon and B. J. Yi, Design and Motion Planning of a Two-
Module Collaborative Indoor Pipeline Inspection Robot, IEEE Trans.
Robotics, vol. 28, no. 3, 2012, pp 681-696.
[6] J. Park, D. Hyun, W. H. Cho, T. H. Kim, and H. S. Yang, Normal-
Force Control for an In-Pipe Robot According to the Inclination of
Pipelines, IEEE Trans. Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, no. 12, 2011,
pp 5304-5310.
[7] Q. Quan and S. Ma, Development of a Modular Crawler for Tracked
Robots, Int. J. Advanced Robotics, vol. 25, no. 13/14, 2011, pp 1839-
1849.
[8] B. Kim, Q. Vu, J. Song, and C. Yim, Novel Design of a Small
Field Robot with Multi-active Crawlers Capable of Autonomous Stair
Climbing, J. Mechanical Science and Technology, vol. 24, no. 1, 2010,
pp 343-350.
[9] Z. Li, S. Ma, B. Li, M. Wang, and Y. Wang, Design and Basic Ex-
periments of a Transformable Wheel-Track Robot with Self-adaptive
Mobile Mechanism, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and
Systems, Taipei, Taiwan, 2010, pp. 1334-1339.
[10] C. Ye, G. Lv, S. Ma, and H. Ni, Development of a Variable Parallel-
ogram Tracked Mobile Robot, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Biomimetics, Guangzhou, China, 2012, pp. 2156-2160.
[11] S. Hirose, H. Ohno, T. Mitsui, and K. Suyama, Design of In-pipe
Inspection Vehicles for ?25, ?50,?150 Pipes, inProc. IEEEInt. Conf.
Robotics and Automation, Detroit, Michigan, 1999, pp. 2309-2314.
1692
