  
  
Abstract— Due to extreme and unpredictable conditions, 
oceanic missions are still a persistent challenge in robotics. 
With the aim of improving decision autonomy and robustness 
against unforeseen circumstances, the EU-funded CoCoRo 
project is developing a cognitive swarm of underwater robots. 
Swarm and cognition algorithms will be studied and validated 
with a large number of miniaturized and affordable AUVs, 
named Jeff, whose custom mechanical design is described in 
this paper. Jeff is conceived for high-mobility in 3D cluttered 
environments and has distributed sensors for multi-directional 
perception and communication. The propulsion and the 
buoyancy systems are designed with watertight and 
energetically efficient solutions to improve system reliability 
and energetic autonomy. The manuscript also describes the 
design of a docking system that allows Jeff to passively align 
and connect to a submerged docking station for battery 
charging. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Potentialities of autonomous underwater vehicles (AUVs) 
have greatly increased during the past thirty years due to the 
progress in sensing technologies as well as the substantial 
improvements in materials and computational capabilities. 
AUVs are nowadays adopted for multiple missions such as 
extensive monitoring, exploration, search and rescue and 
maintenance of underwater infrastructures [1].  
Current missions usually involve complex AUVs 
equipped with multiple and expensive long-range sensors and 
communication systems. These AUVs mainly operate 
individually based on pre-programmed mission plans that 
specify the platform behavior during the entire mission [2]. 
This method limits the capability to react to unforeseen 
circumstances and the possibility to accomplish complex 
tasks without a periodic communication with a human 
operator. In order to improve flexibility and robustness of 
underwater robots, the CoCoRo project (Cognitive 
Cooperative Robots) investigates the development of a 
swarm of AUVs that run cognition-generating software 
running on suitable mechatronics systems [3]. Since robotic 
swarms are scalable, flexible, robust and redundant, 
potentially they can be more efficient in complex and 
unforeseen circumstances [4]. For example, toxic wastes like 
leaking barrels on the seabed produce very weak and 
irregular gradient with multiple local concentration peaks of 
toxic chemicals. Due to its local sensing capabilities, a single 
AUV is likely to stop in a local concentration peak, without 
being able to track the source of the pollution. Conversely, a 
swarm of AUVs, because of their distributed sensing 
 
Authors are with The BioRobotics Institute, Scuola Superiore 
Sant’Anna, Polo Sant’Anna Valdera, Viale Rinaldo Piaggio 34, 56025 
Pontedera (Pisa), Italy. Mail: c.stefanini@sssup.it 
 
capabilities, could effectively navigate in such a weak and 
irregular toxic gradient and locate the source of pollution.  
Only few projects investigated in the past the topic of 
underwater swarm robotics. Serafina [5] paved the way in 
this field addressing AUVs localization, communication and 
shoaling of small groups of robots. AMOUR [6] studied 
cooperative control algorithms for robots and submersed 
sensor nodes. The Co3-AUVs project [7] deals with a swarm 
of AUVs that can seamlessly monitor critical underwater 
infrastructures and detect anomalous situations. Munsun II 
[8] is a swarm of small and inexpensive AUVs for 
environmental monitoring. With respect to the 
aforementioned projects, CoCoRo focuses on a larger swarm 
(30-40 AUVs) driven by biologically inspired motion 
algorithms and self-organization principles for an emerging 
individual and group awareness [3]. 
 
Figure 1. The figure shows how the CoCoRo swarm acts during a mission. 
The swarm is composed of a floating station (c) and two groups of AUVs: 
one is searching for targets on the seafloor (a) while the other (b) is 
establishing a communication chain with the floating station. 
As shown in Fig.1, a CoCoRo swarm is composed of 
multiple miniature AUVs and a floating station. Part of the 
swarm is close to the seafloor searching for a target, while 
other AUVs are recruited for establishing a communication 
bridge connecting the floating station with the AUVs in 
depth. The floating station can transmit the information 
collected by the AUVs to a remote supervisor and it stores an 
energy reservoir that can be shared with the AUVs through a 
dedicated docking system for charging batteries. 
Additionally, the floating station can emit sounds creating a 
virtual fence in order to confine the mission of the AUVs in a 
desired region. 
In order to facilitate and reduce experimental costs, the 
CoCoRo swarm is composed of small and affordable AUVs. 
Research in the field of miniaturized AUVs (volume of the 
order of 1-10 dm
3
) is recently increasing for both industrial 
and academic purposes. For example, EyeBall ROV [9] and 
µAUV [10] are two miniaturized AUVs that are conceived 
for inspection and monitoring of submerged sites that are 
dangerous or inaccessible to humans. The interest in small 
scale AUVs is also driven by the possibility to effectively 
perform experiments, with relatively low costs, in confined 
Mechatronic design of a miniature underwater robot for swarm 
operations 
S. Mintchev, Student, IEEE, E.Donati, Student, IEEE, S.Marrazza, C.Stefanini, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2938
  
environments such as swimming pools. For example 
ANGELS are reconfigurable small AUVs [11] that are 
conceived to investigate underwater navigation and 
communication through a bioinspired electric sense [12][13]. 
The development of such as miniaturized AUVs is 
challenging due to the lack of off-the-shelf components, thus 
a custom design of the main AUV’s systems being often 
required. 
In this article we present the mechatronic design of Jeff, a 
miniature AUV conceived as a fully featured yet affordable 
test bed for underwater swarm experiments. The paper is 
organized as follows: section II starts with an overview of the 
robotic platform. Propulsion, buoyancy and docking systems 
are respectively presented in sections III, IV and V. Section 
VI describes the perception and communication capabilities. 
Finally, section VII concludes with some proposals for 
improvements and future works. 
II. JEFF MECHATRONIC DESIGN 
Jeff is designed in order to respect three main 
requirements: swarm operations, cognition capabilities and 
affordable experimental costs. In more detail: 
• swarm operations are facilitated in 3D environments. 
Indeed, the efficiency of a swarm tends to increase with 
its density, because of the growth in the number of local 
interactions between agents. Nevertheless, a high swarm 
density could cause ”traffic jams” between the agents, 
thus negatively affecting the performance of the whole 
system. 3D environments offer the opportunity to 
increase the number of local interactions while reducing 
the possibilities of traffic jams. Hence, in order to 
increase swarm capabilities, Jeff is designed to ensure a 
high level of mobility in a 3D environment and multi-
directional sensing and communication; 
• cognition is fundamental for the success of a swarm. In 
fact, AUVs with awareness capability can efficiently 
share and balance different tasks between them. In order 
to support a cognition generating software, Jeff is 
equipped with a wide range of proprio and exteroceptive 
sensors and local communication systems; 
• affordable costs are essential to perform experiments 
with a large swarm of AUVs. To reduce the costs yet 
being able to perform significant swarm experiments in a 
conventional swimming pool (3m of depth with 10 m
2
 of 
surface), Jeff is conceived as a miniature AUV with a 
size of 250?120?50 mm and adequate diving capabilities 
(3m). Long-lasting experimental sessions are ensured by 
custom high efficiency solutions for propulsions and by 
docking capability for underwater battery charging. 
As shown in Fig. 2, Jeff has a streamlined shell (a) 
manufactured in rapid prototyping. It is neutrally buoyant 
with a weight of 970 g. Jeff can actively control surge, pitch, 
yaw and heave.  Indeed Jeff’s stern is equipped with two 
propellers (b1 and b2) parallel to the surge axis while Jeff’s 
nose houses a bow thruster that is parallel to the sway axis 
(c) and a buoyancy system (d). Roll is not actively controlled 
and the stability of the AUV around this axis is achieved 
passively by tuning the distribution of the internal ballast, 
which allows to modify the position of the center of mass 
with respect to the center of buoyancy. Jeff is controlled 
with custom electronic boards (e) and energy is stored in a 
lithium battery pack (f) located in Jeff’s stern.  
 
Figure 2. Overview of Jeff design. Fig. 2A shows a 3D model of Jeff’s main 
mechatronics systems: a. shell, b. aft propulsion units, c. bow thruster unit, d. 
buoyancy system, e. control and power management PCBs, f. battery pack, g. 
expansion connector for sensors, h. blue lights, k. underwater docking 
station, l. microphone. Fig. 2B is a picture of Jeff in which can be seen: i. the 
electrodes for the potential field communication (only one is point out) and j. 
the right loudspeaker. 
 
Each AUV is equipped with a wide range of sensors and 
local communication systems. Underwater navigation relies 
on a pressure sensor to measure depth and a gyroscope, an 
accelerometer and a magnetometer to control attitude and 
locomotion. Each platform is aware of its residual energy 
TABLE I 
Main Jeff’s features and characteristics 
Size and weight 
250x120x50 mm 
1.2 kg  
DOF 
Surge, 500 mm/s 
Yaw, 90 °/s 
Dive, 80 mm/s up to 3 m 
Energy source 
8 Li-Po cells with a capacity of 880 mAh 
each.  
Autonomy up to 120 minutes. 
Sensors 
Pressure 
Magnetometer, gyro and accelerometer 
Battery status monitoring 
Communication 
(up to 1 m range) 
Blue light  
Electric fields 
Sensorized payloads Temperature, chemicals, camera 
Cost 
Mechanics                    800 € 
Electronics + sensors   400 € 
 
 
2939
  
thanks to dedicated circuits that monitor battery life. Jeff can 
be specialized thanks to additional sensor payloads (e.g. 
temperature, concentration of chemicals, camera) that can be 
plugged into Jeff’s shell (g). Presently, communication 
between AUVs relies on BlueLight units (h) [5] and 
potential fields (i) according to a bioinspired approach 
[12][13]. The layout of the communication systems 
(multiple blue light cluster and multiple electrodes) ensures 
a wide coverage allowing Jeff to exchange information from 
multiple directions up to 1 m.  
The main features and capabilities of Jeff are summarized 
in Table I. 
III. AFT PROPULSION SYSTEM 
Although many artificial and biomimetic systems are 
proposed in the literature, only few of them are suitable for 
small-scale AUVs [10]. Propellers are reliable and widely 
used since they are well studied and their design and control 
is simpler compared to other propulsion devices (e.g. bio-
inspired locomotion systems [14]). 
The propulsion unit of miniature AUVs requires a design, 
which is at the same time compact, waterproof and 
energetically efficient. A solution to this problem is given by 
rim driven thrusters and custom designed brushless motors, 
where the rotor forms a ring around the propeller and the 
stator is encapsulated in a thin duct that surrounds it. In this 
design electronics is fully encapsulated, making the system 
entirely waterproof and pressure tolerant. A cheaper, but less 
optimized approach consists of directly using brushless 
motors [8] that are properly coated to avoid corrosion and 
electrical short circuits. The authors adopt an intermediate 
approach that involves the use of commercially available DC 
motors in combination with custom designed magnetic 
coupling to ensure waterproofness. Although this design is 
used on multiple large scale AUVs (e.g. SeaBED AUV, 
AutosubLR, Tethys, Delphin2), its application to small 
robots benefits from scale effects of the magnetic forces. To 
the best of our knowledge, miniaturized magnetic coupling 
have been used only in ANGELS [11]. 
 
Figure 3. A. Partial section of the aft propellers highlighting the main 
components. B. Detailed view of the magnetic coupling. 
Fig. 3 shows the aft propulsion system with its main 
components: two DC motors (a) (Precision Microdrives 108-
104) in parallel configuration generating the torque required 
by the propeller (experimentally measured up to 1.2 Nmm); 
a series of gears (b) with a ratio of 9:48 and a shaft (c) 
supported by two radial ball bearings (d); a series of internal 
(e) and external (f) magnets that are coupled across the thin 
septum (0.4 mm) of the dry magnets housing (g); a propeller 
(h) with an outer diameter of 25 mm and two additional 
magnets (i) that compensate the static instability of the 
magnetic coupling. The magnetic coupling transmits the 
torque from the motor to the propeller without any 
mechanical connection ensuring complete waterproofness. 
A.  The magnetic coupling 
The magnetic coupling is composed of a dry (Fig. 3B) and 
a wet part: the former is directly connected to the shaft of the 
motor, while the latter is integrated within the hub of the 
propeller. Each part of the magnetic coupling consists of six 
cylindrical N35 neodymium magnets with height and 
diameter of 3 mm and axial magnetization. The magnets are 
arranged in a circular path (diameter of 6.3 mm) with 
alternate magnetization. Because of the aforementioned 
magnetic layout, the magnetic coupling behaves like a 
torsional spring. When the dry part of the magnetic coupling 
rotates axially with respect to the propeller (angle ? in Fig. 
3), a torque (T
m
) is generated. The propeller remains 
attached to the robot because of an attraction force (F
m
) 
between the dry and the wet magnets. The value of T
m 
and 
F
m
 as a function of ? are shown in Fig 4. 
 
Figure 4. The two graphs shows the trend of F m and T m as a function of the 
angle ?. Both T m and F m are evaluated with a magnetostatic finite element 
analysis. 
There is a sphere (2 mm diameter) on each side of the 
magnetic coupling. The two spheres are in contact with the 
septum of the dry magnets housing (g) and are compressed 
by the attraction force F
m
. Therefore, suitable materials need 
to be considered in order to prevent and reduce wear effects. 
Conductive materials are not compatible since the rotation of 
the magnets generates eddy currents causing a braking 
effect. For this reason, two non-conductive materials with 
high mechanical and thermal resistance are employed: PEEK 
for the housing (Polyether ether ketone) and ceramic for the 
spheres. 
Over being watertight, the proposed design is intrinsically 
more efficient than the use of conventional seals (e.g. o-ring, 
spring seals) around the propeller shaft (c). Indeed, while in 
the magnetic coupling the transmission losses are 
concentrated in the contact between the two spheres and the 
dry magnet housing (g), conventional seals works 
compressed around the propeller shaft causing high 
frictional losses. Experimental measurements reveal that the 
frictional torque generated by the contact of the two spheres 
has an average value of 0.5 Nmm, while, in a motor shaft 
safely sealed with a 006 o-ring (internal diameter of 1/8 
2940
  
inches), frictional torque can reach 6 Nmm [15]. 
A.  The magnetic stabilization system 
Since magnets are statically unstable, the propeller tends 
to pivot around the external contact sphere until it touches 
the PEEK housing (g). This drawback is solved with a 
dedicated stabilization system. 
 
Figure 5. Two stabilization systems: A with a fluidic bearing, B with 
stabilizing magnets.  
As shown in Fig. 5A, in a previous design [11] the authors 
used a dynamic stabilization system with a fluidic bearing 
composed of a thin film of water within the motor housing 
and an external cylinder. The film of water ensures stability 
during rotation by generating a force that counterbalances 
the oscillation of the propeller. This solution has two main 
drawbacks: it adds friction to the system due to the viscous 
forces in the fluidic bearing, and it does not provide stability 
at low speed.  
 
Figure 6. Bending moment as a function of the corresponding pivoting angle 
?. Mu (unstabilized bending) considers uniquely the effect of the magnetic 
couplings, while in Ms (stabilized bending) the effect of the two stabilizing 
magnets is added. According to the trend of Ms, the two additional magnets 
have a stabilizing effect since the bending moment acts against the pivoting 
motion of the propeller. 
In order to overcome these limitations (Fig. 5B), Jeff’s 
propulsion units are equipped with a stabilization system 
composed of two magnets: one is housed in the propeller, 
while the second one is connected to Jeff’s shell and is 
aligned with the internal shaft (c in Fig. 3A). Since the two 
magnets are attracting each other, they produce a stabilizing 
moment that prevents the propeller to pivot around the 
contact sphere. The stabilization effect of the magnets is 
highlighted in Fig. 6. 
B.  Propeller performances 
The performances of the aft propulsion system have been 
experimentally measured in static conditions. The system 
has been modified with a longer dry magnet housing (150 
mm) in order to submerge the propeller while maintaining 
the DC motors outside. During the test, voltages from 0.2V 
to 4V with 0.2V steps were applied to the DC motors. 
Current was recorded as well as the thrust of the propeller 
(measured with a ±10N load cell connected to a 4464 Instron 
machine).  
The static tests were repeated 10 times and the results 
were averaged. The thrust generated by the propeller as a 
function of the overall electrical power consumption is 
shown in Fig 7. 
 
Figure 7. The graph shows the thrust generated by the aft propeller, versus 
the electric power consumption. 
C.  Bow thruster 
Jeff is equipped with a directional propeller to steer the 
robot left and right. Since this propulsion unit passes through 
Jeff’s bow, it has a different design compared to the stern 
propulsion units. 
 
Figure 8. For sake of clarity, the images propose a partially exploded view of 
the systems. Fig. 8A shows the bow thruster assembly and exploded 
components. Fig. 8B shows the buoyancy assembly and exploded 
components. 
As shown in Fig. 8A, the system is composed of two 
contra rotating propellers (a) each one driven by its own DC 
motor (b) (N20 DC Motor from Gizmo’s zone). Like the 
previous design, torque is transmitted with two series of 
magnets that couple the two external propellers with two 
rings (c) inside Jeff’s shell. Each ring is constrained with a 
thin section radial ball bearing (d) and it is connected to the 
motor with a pair of spur gears with a reduction ratio of 
16:70 (e). In this case, a stabilization system is not required 
since the two propellers are constrained to rotate around a 1 
mm shaft (f). 
IV.  BUOYANCY SYSTEM 
Jeff is equipped with a buoyancy system (Fig. 8B) in 
order to actively control its depth. 
A cam (a) converts the rotational motion of a DC motor 
(Precision Microdrives 212-117)(b) into a translation of two 
pistons (c), one on each side of the robot. The cam has a 
linear profile, it can rotate at 90° and allows to move the two 
pistons ±2 mm. By controlling the position of the piston the 
overall volume of the robot is modified, thus the buoyancy is 
controlled. The waterproofness of the system is guaranteed 
by means of rolling diaphragms (d), a durable, flexible 
membrane shaped like a top hat with the peak of the hat 
2941
  
fastened to the end of the piston and the brim clamped to the 
piston housing (e) and tightened with six screws on a flange 
(f). Inside the cylinder, the rolling diaphragm forms a 
continuous seal between the piston head and cylinder wall. 
When the piston is moving, the rolling diaphragm rolls along 
the cylinder walls. Compared to conventional sealing 
solutions, rolling diaphragms have the advantage to be 
almost frictionless and watertight. The system generates a 
buoyancy force of ± 2 g that corresponds to a steady vertical 
velocity of 0.08 m/s. Because Jeff is conceived for 
experiments in swimming pools, in order to reduce costs, the 
buoyancy system is designed for a maximum depth of 3 m. 
V. DOCKING SYSTEM 
Since the operative life of AUVs during missions is 
mostly constrained by energy and data storage limitations, 
the CoCoRo swarm includes a floating station equipped with 
a submerged docking station that can exchange information 
and charge the AUV’s batteries. The floating station can 
carry a large battery payload that can be potentially refilled 
with energy scavenged from sun or wind and can easily 
communicate with a remote operator that can update the 
AUV’s mission. Similarly to the work presented by some of 
the authors in [11] the docking station and the AUVs are 
equipped with magnets that provide passive alignment at 
short range (i.e. one AUV’s body-length). When the robot 
enters in the attraction region generated by the magnet of the 
docking station, the robot is attracted and passively driven 
for a successful connection. Hence, this system is able to 
reduce both complexity and precision required by the 
docking control algorithms [16] and sensors. Indeed, part of 
the “computation and perception” required for guidance and 
alignment is passively performed by the magnetic 
interaction. 
 
Figure 9. The figure shows the 3D models of the docking station and of Jeff’s 
nose. 
As shown in Fig. 9, the docking station is composed of a 
waterproof case (a) that contains a rotating magnet (b) and a 
DC motor (c). The magnet is diametrically magnetized and it 
can be actively oriented by the DC motor. When Jeff needs 
to be docked, the magnet is oriented in an attractive 
configuration with respect to the magnet which is located in 
Jeff’s nose (e).  When recharging is completed, the magnet 
in the docking station is rotated at 180°. This generates a 
repulsive force that disengages the AUV with no 
contribution from the propellers.  
A probe (f) and drogue (g) system provides the final and 
precise positioning that is required for a successful electrical 
connection. The charging station is equipped with two 
electrical connectors (h1 and h2) that are inserted inside a 
“floating” frame (i). The frame is connected with cables (not 
shown in Fig. 9) to the charging station in order to passively 
compensate for possible oscillations of the AUV caused by 
waves. 
The working principle of this system is based on the so 
called attraction region, which can be defined as the space 
where an AUV has to enter in order to be passively aligned 
for a successful connection with the docking station 
(illustration in Fig. 9E). The shape and the dimension of the 
attraction region are a function of: i. the alignment forces 
generated by the magnets; ii. the dynamic behavior of the 
AUV, which is a function of its inertial properties and shape; 
iii. the geometrical compliancy of the probe and drogue 
system. The attraction region can be estimated by 
numerically calculating the trajectory of the AUV under the 
effect of the magnetic attraction of the docking station. The 
case study presented here, concerns the connection between 
an AUV and a fixed docking station assuming that: i. the 
AUV moves in the horizontal plane (this study is valid if the 
AUV is kept at the same depth of the docking station by 
means of a closed loop depth control or if the connection is 
performed at surface); ii. the magnetic interaction is 
evaluated by approximating the permanent magnets as 
magnetic dipoles; iii. the docking station is fixed and it is 
composed of a conical indentation, which acts as a drogue 
element, while the AUV is equipped with a spiky probe.  
 
Figure 10. The graph shows the gain of misalignment that can be 
compensated if Jeff is frontally approaching the docking station with 
different steady velocity in the range of 20-50 mm/s. Considering the length 
of Jeff, this velocity corresponds to 0.8-2 BL/s (Body-Length/second).  
As shown in Fig. 10, Jeff is assumed to approach the 
docking station parallel to the Xw axis, starting from an 
initial distance where the magnetic interaction can be 
neglected. The AUV moves at a steady velocity by means of 
a propulsion force generated by the propeller, which is kept 
constant during the simulation (no active alignment 
techniques are considered). The probe of the fixed docking 
cone can compensate a misalignment along the Yw axis of 
±h (6 mm). The simulation aims at evaluating the previously 
defined attraction region, hence the maximum distance y of 
the AUV from Xw that the magnetic attraction can 
compensate to guarantee a successful probe and drogue 
2942
  
match. Considering Jeff’s main parameters, the results of the 
simulation are shown in Fig. 10, where the y/h ratio is 
plotted as a function of the initial steady velocity of the 
AUV. As expected, the proposed system amplifies the 
misalignment that can be successfully compensated by the 
geometrical properties of the docking system. However, 
alignment capabilities are strongly affected by the dynamics 
(initial steady velocity) of the AUV. 
VI. SENSING AND  COMMUNICATION 
Jeff is equipped with BlueLight communication and 
sensing devices on its six sides (h in Fig. 2). Each BlueLight 
unit comprises four blue LEDs [5] that ensure high 
penetration in the water: a pair of long range (1 m), narrow-
beam (60°) LEDs and a pair of low intensity (0.5 m), wide-
beam (120°) LEDs. Each unit is also equipped with two 
photodiodes, one for communication and the other to detect 
and measure the distance from obstacles. In addition Jeff is 
equipped with 14 electrodes that are used as potential field 
sensors for communication and localization [12][13] within 
a range of 250-500mm.  
In addition, Jeff is equipped with an acoustic sensing 
system, which is used in order to constrain the swarm in a 
desired region. Indeed, the floating station generates an 
acoustic virtual fence that limits AUV’s movements. The 
floating station emits an acoustic signal at the frequency of 5 
kHz, which is received by a microphone located on the top 
of Jeff’s shell (l in Fig. 2). If the sound perceived by Jeff 
decreases under a threshold, the AUV swims back following 
the sound gradient. The acoustic system is designed to create 
a virtual confinement up to 10 m from the floating station. 
Furthermore, each robot is equipped with two loudspeakers 
(j), one for each side. Their use for localization and 
communication  (range of 0.5-1 m) is currently under 
investigation. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents Jeff, a miniature AUV that has been 
conceived to perform affordable swarm experiments in 
confined underwater environments. To take full advantage 
of the swarm behavior, Jeff is capable of 3D swimming, 
local sensing and communication from multiple directions. 
Due to the lack of off the shelf components for miniaturized 
AUVs, Jeff’s main systems are custom designed. Those are 
conceived to be both watertight and energetically efficient 
thanks to miniaturized magnetic couplings for the propellers 
and rolling diaphragms for the buoyancy system. Extended 
operations are ensured by Jeff’s docking capabilities. 
Docking is based on permanents magnets, a solution that 
ensures a short-range, passive and precise connection 
between Jeff and the submersed docking station. 
Future work mainly involves the implementation of 
cognitions and awareness generating algorithms in order to 
perform autonomous swarm experiments. Docking will also 
become fully autonomous thanks to tailored control 
algorithms integrated with the passive magnetic alignment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is founded by the EU project CoCoRo 
(Collective Cognitive Robots) number 270382, call FP7-
ICT-2009-6. The authors would like to thank Mr Godfried 
Jansen van Vuuren for his technical support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Yuh, J.; Marani, G.; Blidberg, D.R., “Applications of marine robotic 
vehicles,” Intelligent Service Robotics, Volume 4, Issue 4, pp 221-231 
October 2011 
[2] Hagen, P.E.; Hegrenæs, Ø.; Jalving, B; Midtgaard, Ø.; Wiig, M.; 
Hagen, O.K.; “Making AUVs Truly Autonomous”. Underwater 
Vehicles, Ed. A V Inzartsev, pp. 582, I_Tech, Vienna, Austria, 
December 2008. 
[3] Schmickl, T.; Thenius, R.; Moslinger, C.; Timmis, J.; Tyrrell, A.; 
Read, M.; Hilder, J.; Halloy, J.; Campo, A.; Stefanini, C.; Manfredi, 
L.; Orofino, S.; Kernbach, S.; Dipper, T.; Sutantyo, D., "CoCoRo -- 
The Self-Aware Underwater Swarm," Self-Adaptive and Self-
Organizing Systems Workshops (SASOW), 2011 Fifth IEEE 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.120,126, 3-7 Oct. 2011 
[4] Beni, G.; “From swarm intelligence to swarm robotics,” in Swarm 
Robotics - SAB 2004 International Workshop, ser. LNCS, E. S ?ahin 
and W. M. Spears, Eds., vol. 3342. Santa Monica, CA: Springer-
Verlag, Jul. 2005, pp. 1–9.  
[5] Schill, F.; Zimmer, U.; and Trumpf, J.; “Visible spectrum optical 
communications and distance sensing for underwater applications,” In 
In Proc. Australasian Conf. Robotics and Automation, Canberra, 
2004. 
[6] M.Dunbabin, P.Corke, I.Vasilescu, and D.Rus “Experiments with 
Cooperative Control of Underwater Robots” The International Journal 
of Robotics Research June 2009 28: 815-833 
[7] Simetti, E.; Turetta, A.; Casalino, G.; Cresta, M., "Towards the use of 
a team of USVs for civilian harbour protection: The problem of 
intercepting detected menaces," OCEANS 2010 IEEE - Sydney, vol., 
no., pp.1,7, 24-27 May 2010 
[8] Osterloh, C.; Pionteck, T.; Maehle, E.; "MONSUN II: A small and 
inexpensive AUV for underwater swarms," Robotics; Proceedings of 
ROBOTIK 2012; 7th German Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 21-22 
May 2012 
[9] Rust, I.C.; Asada, H.H., "The eyeball ROV: Design and control of a 
spherical underwater vehicle steered by an internal eccentric mass," 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.5855,5862, 9-13 May 2011 
[10] Watson, S.A.; Green, P.N., "Propulsion systems for micro-
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (µAUVs)," Robotics Automation 
and Mechatronics (RAM), 2010 IEEE Conference on , vol., no., 
pp.435,440, 28-30 June 2010 
[11] Mintchev, S.; Stefanini, C.; Girin, A.; Marrazza, S.; Orofino, S.; 
Lebastard, V.; Manfredi, L.; Dario, P.; Boyer, F., "An underwater 
reconfigurable robot with bioinspired electric sense," Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on , vol., 
no., pp.1149,1154, 14-18 May 2012 
[12] Boyer, F.; Lebastard, V.; Chevallereau, C.; Servagent, N., 
"Underwater Reflex Navigation in Confined Environment Based on 
Electric Sense," Robotics, IEEE Transactions on , vol.29, no.4, 
pp.945,956, Aug. 2013 
[13] C. D. Hopkins, "Electrical perception and communication," in 
Encyclopedia of Neuroscience. vol. 3, L. Squire, Ed., ed Oxford: 
Academic Press, 2009, pp. 813-831. 
[14] Stefanini, C.; Orofino, S.; Manfredi, L.; Mintchev, S.; Marrazza, S.; 
Assaf, T.; Capantini, L.; Sinibaldi, E.; Grillner, S.; Wallén, P.; Dario, 
P.; (2012) A novel autonomous, bioinspired swimming robot 
developed by neuroscientists and bioengineers. Bioinspiration and 
Biomimetics, vol. 7, n. 2, pp. 1748-3190 
[15] Parker o-ring handbook.  
[16] Sutantyo, D.; Buntoro, D.; Levi, P.; Mintchev, S.; Stefanini, C., 
"Optical-guided autonomous docking method for underwater 
reconfigurable robot," Technologies for Practical Robot Applications 
(TePRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 
22-23 April 2013 
 
2943
