People Detection and Tracking from Aerial Thermal Views
Jan Portmann, Simon Lynen, Margarita Chli and Roland Siegwart
Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich
Abstract— Detection and tracking of people in visible-light
images has been subject to extensive research in the past
decades with applications ranging from surveillance to search-
and-rescue. Following the growing availability of thermal cam-
eras and the distinctive thermal signature of humans, research
effort has been focusing on developing people detection and
tracking methodologies applicable to this sensing modality.
However, a plethora of challenges arise on the transition from
visible-light to thermal images, especially with the recent trend
of employing thermal cameras onboard aerial platforms (e.g.
in search-and-rescue research) capturing oblique views of the
scenery. This paper presents a new, publicly available dataset
of annotated thermal image sequences, posing a multitude of
challenges for people detection and tracking. Moreover, we
propose a new particle ﬁlter based framework for tracking
people in aerial thermal images. Finally, we evaluate the
performance of this pipeline on our dataset, incorporating a
selection of relevant, state-of-the-art methods and present a
comprehensive discussion of the merits spawning from our
study.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the relaxation of the almost exclusive use of thermal
cameras on military applications, the research community
has been experiencing growing interest in their use in appli-
cations such as search-and-rescue. While people tracking in
visible-light images has been studied for decades, the appli-
cation of the developed methodologies on thermal images is
far from straight-forward. As visual appearance cues in form
of color and texture are no longer available, optaining mean-
ingful segmentation results becomes challenging, especially
given variable environmental conditions (e.g., weather, type
of scenery). Beause texture information from color is rare,
associating detections of humans before and after their paths
cross is no longer possible unless tracking is employed on a
sequence of consecutive images.
With the increasing resolution and decreasing size, weight,
cost and power consumption of thermal cameras, mounting
them onboard aerial platforms for search-and-rescue scenar-
ios has become increasingly popular where victims often
need to be searched for within a potentially large area. In
order to boost effectiveness of rescue missions, we aim for
employing Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UA Vs) to gain an
overview of the scene. However, people detection from such
oblique, top-down views is a real challenge and little work
exists in the literature addressing this problem, especially in
the context of thermal imaging.
The research leading to these results has received funding from the
European Community’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7) under grant
agreements n.285417 (ICARUS) and n.600958 (SHERPA).
Fig. 1: Intermediate results within our framework, operating on both frontal
(top row) and oblique (bottom row) views of humans. The raw image (in
(a) and (d)) is background-segmented (in (b) and (e)), followed by the
application of the proposed Body Part Detector (BPD) and the particle ﬁlter
tracker (in (c) and (f), respectively). Black: background, white: foreground,
brown: foreground blob, blue: tracker, green: particles, red: detection.
We propose a detection and tracking system processing
thermal image sequences viewing the scene from viewpoints
resembling those captured from of a UA V . As a novelty, we
introduce a pipeline containing a robust background subtrac-
tion method and a particle ﬁlter guided detector. We show
that our tracking framework outperforms all implemented
detectors in terms of recall rates at high precision even if the
camera setup experiences large, unsteady motion. Our frame-
work achieves dramatic improvement on recall (of about 7
the recall of the best detector, on occasions), while reaching
real-time performance of 16 Hz. Fig. 1 shows intermediate
steps within our tracking pipeline when operating on both
frontal and oblique views of humans present in our manually
annotated and publicly available dataset.
A. People Detection & Tracking in visible-light images
Detecting and tracking people, and more generally, ob-
jects, has been a very active area of research over the last
couple of decades. The works in [1] and [2] present a
thorough study of state-of-the-art people detectors. When an
image sequence is available, tracking on top of pure detection
can provide better performance as discussed in [3]. One of
the ﬁrst object detection approaches was proposed by Viola
and Jones [4], initially for face detection. Inspired by [4] in
this paper we adapt and extend this methodology to construct
a body part detector in the people detection paradigm, as
discussed in Section II-B. Another extremely popular detec-
tion algorithm is based on Histograms of Oriented Gradients
(HOG) [5] which allows the comparison of an object shape
with a pre-trained model. An extension has been proposed
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1794
in [6], which takes body parts and their relative position into
account, however at the cost of lower processing speed [1].
B. From visible-light to thermal image sequences
The application of such detectors on thermal imagery
however poses several challenges: Thermal cameras still
have signiﬁcantly lower resolution than their visible-light
counterparts and are commonly corrupted by thermal noise.
Additionally, reasoning between different, correctly classiﬁed
objects becomes more difﬁcult since texture information is
rare. In [7], thermal as well as visible-light images are com-
bined to detect cars and humans from a UA V viewpoint. In
[8], thermal cameras have been applied to track pedestrians
from an upfront viewpoint for night driving using a fusion
of the hyper permutation network, a hierarchical contour
matching algorithm and a cascaded classiﬁer, respectively. A
detector based on SURF features aided by a Kalman ﬁlter to
predict the motion of individual features has been proposed
in [9].
Since humans most often have a different body tempera-
ture than the surrounding background, background subtrac-
tion method offers a ﬁrst and fast selection method to trun-
cate the detector search space to image regions containing
humans. In [10] and [11], a background subtraction method
has been applied, which requires a static thermal camera for
surveillance scenarios. In this work, we employ the ViBe
[12] background estimation, which is capable of segmenting
regions that are both hotter and colder than the environment
and can deal with situations where the camera is moving,
which is essential in our UA V application. Our algorithm
processes thermal (long-infrared) wavelengths only, enabling
tracking during night and in other situations where the image
quality of visible-light cameras is limited. As the framework
is intended to be carried by a UA V , we focus on camera
scenes from an elevated platform, where humans appear and
move differently in image space than when observed from a
ground based viewpoint. Our particle ﬁlter follows the ap-
proach of [13] with several necessary adjustments described
in section Section II-C to enable tracking in thermal rather
than visible imagery and on the limited computational power
that can be carried by a small-sized UA V .
II. METHODOLOGY
Our approach comprises of three steps. Background sub-
traction is used to generate candidate foreground regions for
accelerated detection and improved tracking performance.
We employ several detectors in our pipeline and evaluate
their performance. Finally, the tracker uses both detections
as well as foreground regions classiﬁed by the ﬁrst step as
guidance.
A. Background Subtraction
Background subtraction effectively reduces the search
space for the people detector, which is otherwise the most
time consuming part of the tracking process, as evident in
Table I. The employed background subtraction method ViBe
[12] stores a background model by randomly selecting image
Fig. 2: Example of pairs of raw images with the obtained detections using
the Body Part Detector; in (a) is a human in oblique view, in (b) the human
occupies a small image region, and in (c) is a true negative detection. Color-
coding of rectangles: red - head, green - upper body, blue - legs, pink - whole
human.
Fig. 3: Examples of training images for the different body parts in the BPD,
enlarged for illustration without interpolation. In (a) are training images for
heads, (b) for upper bodies, and (c) for legs.
values at the current pixel location from past frames and
image values at the location of neighbouring pixels in the
current image. Every pixel of a new image is classiﬁed
as background if its intensity value is within a predeﬁned
threshold of the background model pixels. Connected fore-
ground regions of a number of pixels above a threshold, form
ROIs. We adapt our implementation to allow processing of
16-bit images and introduce a variable threshold which is
based on the standard deviation over the image instead of a
ﬁxed threshold.
B. Detector
Within our tracker framework, we employ different de-
tectors publicly available in OpenCV and propose a part
based detector. For the high performance [1] HOG detector
a descriptor is obtained by calculating histograms of image
gradients followed by ordering and normalizing them in
blocks followed by e.g. a SVM based training. A sliding
window approach, is then commonly used for object de-
tection. We trained our own HOG classiﬁer using a linear
SVM and our training dataset described in Section III with a
cell size of 88, a block size of 1616 px and 12864 px
sized training images. Additionally we implemented a HOG
classiﬁer trained on the well-known INRIA [5] dataset, which
contains visible-light images only. An extension to HOG,
LatentSVM [14] detects not only objects in the exact shape it
has been trained for, but also in different body conﬁgurations
in the case of articulated objects such as humans. Instead of
classifying an object as a whole, LatentSVM searches for
distinctive parts and returns a conﬁdence value, taking into
account the positions of the detected parts. As for HOG, we
trained a detector with our own thermal dataset as well as
the INRIA dataset using the parameters suggested by the
authors.
Another detector concept is based on cascades of Local
Binary Patterns (LBP) [15]. Here the image intensity of
points around a center pixel are compared to the intensity of
1795
the center pixel itself the binary test results are accumulated
in a histogram within a cell of pixels. In the training
step, boosting techniques are applied to select the most
representative features. Combining these tests in a cascade
allow high detection rates by gradually ﬁltering out non
matching objects. Object classiﬁcation of input images is
obtained by using a sliding window approach and a pyramid
representation of the image. Here, the LBP cascade is trained
with our thermal training set.
To render cascades of simple features more competitive,
we extend a Haar feature based cascade to what we coin
as the “Body Part based Detector (BPD)”. Haar features
are composed of rectangular windows containing two image
regions, over which the pixel intensities are added; the
difference of these sums correspond to the feature we use. As
in [4], distinctive features are selected from positive training
images using AdaBoost [16], tested against negative training
images and stored in a cascade. To cope with the varying
sizes and poses of humans observed from a UA V perspective,
we only choose to train on head, upper body and legs as the
most characteristic parts potentially observable.
After ﬁnding head candidates by applying a sliding win-
dow approach, new image scan windows are constructed by
rotating rectangles around the candidate followed by apply-
ing a second detector trained for upper bodies. If the response
is above a threshold, the procedure is repeated to search for
a single leg. Thus, the detector becomes rotation-invariant
and able to classify humans at different angles. Furthermore
the employed individual detectors remain simple and can
be trained very quickly, as opposed to diversifying the fun-
damental features. The overall detection speed outperforms
other detectors such as HOG (see Table I). Fig. 3 illustrates
training examples, while Fig. 2 shows example detections of
our BPD.
C. Tracker
A tracker increases considerably the identiﬁcation and
location accuracy of an object making use of both detection
results and temporal constraints. Our approach is based on a
particle ﬁlter, such that each identiﬁed object is assigned a
number of particles. Following the assignment of detections
in a new image to the corresponding particle clouds of the
tracker, the particles are attributed a weight based on how
well they represent the actual object. These weights are then
sampled from a probability distribution used to determine
the future location of the object.
Each trackerT
L
is composed of a label L, K particles
P, the last associated guidance candidateC deﬁned later in
Eq. (2), a rectangle r of dimensions corresponding to the
average of the last N
r
associated guidance candidates, as
well as the position m and velocity u of the tracker (mean
of the particles):
T
L
:fL;P =fP
0
;P
1
;:::;P
K
g; m; u;C; rg (1)
1) Update: We chose a constant velocity model to de-
scribe the propagation of the particlesP for each tracker
where the process noise for the position and velocity are
drawn from a zero-mean normal distribution N (0;

2
x;v

),
where  is the number of successfully associated frames
up to a threshold. This allows the tracker to close in to
the object movement behaviour. Additionally, each particle
carries a weight w to indicate the likelihood of the particle
correctly tracking the object. To account for rough camera
movement and the associated error in velocity estimation,
particle prediction is driven by a homography obtained from
frame to frame optical ﬂow tracking.
2) Association: Detections, as well as ROIs retrieved from
the detectors in Section II-B and the background subtraction
in Section II-A are merged into tracker guidance candidates
C
i
containing a position m, a rectangle r and a weight
obtained by the detector.
C
i
:fm; r;weightg (2)
We divide large foreground regions containing smaller
detections into two separate candidates and replace similarly
sized regions with their corresponding overlaying detections.
Then, a matching matrix can be constructed with matching
scores S
iL
for each guidance candidateC
i
to every current
tracker. The score of aC
i
is calculated by taking into account
the probability distributions on the difference in rectangle
sizes p(r
iL
), the distance to the last associated guidance
p(m
iL
), the distances to the tracker particles p(d
iLk
),
a score indicating how well the candidate position is in
accordance to the tracker velocity g(C
i
(m);T
L
(m; u)), the
result of ViBe and a weighting factor on detections 
det
,
according to:
S
iL
=p(r
iL
)p(m
iL
)g(C
i
(m);T
L
(m; u))

det

K
X
k2T
L
(P)
p(d
iLk
) ; (3)
where
r
iL
=kC
i
(r) T
L
(r)k; p(r
iL
)N (0;
2
r
)
m
iL
=kC
i
(m) T
L
(C(m))k; p(m
iL
)N (0;
2
m
)
d
iLk
=kC
i
(m) T
L
(P (x)
k
)k; p(d
iLk
)N (0;
2
d
):
(4)
It should be noted that r
iL
is calculated by comparing
the height and width of the detection and the past associated
detections and m
iL
by subtracting the distance from the
position of the guidance candidate to the position of last
successfully associated guidance of the tracker. The distance
of the position x of the individual tracker particle P
k
to the
position of the candidate is named d
iLk
. The weighting
factor 
det
is implemented to favor detector to background
subtraction output and is deﬁned by:

det
=

 ifC
i
2 detections
1 ifC
i
2 foreground
(5)
1796
As with all the thresholds we use in this work, the value
of  has been determined using nonlinear optimization on
a seperate training dataset (”Sempach-11”), as described in
Section III-B.
Inspired by [13], g(C
i
(m);T
L
(m; u)) takes into account
the velocity of the tracker according to:
g(C
i
(m);T
L
(m; u)) =

p(s
iL
)
dist
ifkT
L
(u)k<
q(C
i
(m);T
L
(m; u)) otherwise,
(6)
where
s
iL
=kC
i
(m) T
L
(m)k;p(s
iL
)N (0;
2
s
) ;
such that s
iL
represents the distance between the guidance
candidate and the position of the tracker and is a threshold
on the tracker speed. FunctionqN (0;
2
q
) assigns a weight
based on a zero-mean Gaussian distribution by calculating
the distance of the candidate location C
i
(m) to the line
deﬁned by the tracker locationT
L
(m) and the velocity vector
T
L
(u), divided by m
iL
(Eq. (4)) and weighted by the norm
of the difference of the normalized association vector to the
candidate location and the normalized velocity vector. Only
trackers that have a speed more than  beneﬁt from this
function to suppress noise.
Having obtained the matching score matrix, the particle
ﬁlter associates highest matching guidance candidates to the
corresponding trackers, forming a newT
L
(C).
3) Particle Weighting: The next step in particle ﬁltering
involves the calculation of the individual particle weights
w
P
k
for each trackerT
L
:
w
P
k
=p(k(P
k
(x)) C(m)k)'(P
k
(x)) +; (7)
with N (0;
2

) to prevent particle starvation due to
similarw, the distance of the particle to the guidanceC (zero
if none associated) taking values inp(k(P
k
(x)) C(m))k)
N (0;
2
w
) and the weighting factor ' deﬁned as:
'(P
k
(x)) =

> 1 if x
i
2 foreground
1 otherwise,
(8)
to increase the weight if the particle is located on fore-
ground.
4) Resampling: Finally, a random number drawn from the
uniform distribution from zero to the sum of all the particle
weights is taken. New particles are then selected by summing
up their associated weights until their sum is higher or equal
to the random number.
5) Initialization: A new cloud of normally distributed
particles around the detection center is initialized for a new
tracker if an unassociated candidate detection is above a
threshold, fully inside the frame and positively classiﬁed by
the detector in two consecutive frames.
6) Deletion: To avoid ghost trackers with no associated
detections or ROIs, each tracker is examined at every it-
eration to reside within the frame and have an association
with a ROI not further further back than a ﬁxed number of
frames n
ROI
< n
detection
and a ﬁxed number of iterations
n
detection
. Association vectors 
L
between trackerT
L
and
the corresponding detection or ROI have to be steady in both
direction and length, since heavily ﬂuctuating associations
are most likely caused by misguided trackers. This is decided
by setting a threshold , which needs to be larger than
the averaged dot product (
L
) of the association vectors
divided by the average vector length deﬁned as bias(
L
).
Namely,  is deﬁned as:
 >
 (
L
)
bias(
L
)
(9)
 (
L
) =
1
2(N  1)
2
N
X
j2V
L
N
X
k2V
L


L;j

L;k
if j < k
0 otherwise,
(10)
whereV
L
=f
t
L
;
t 1
L
;:::;
t N
L
g are the pastN association
vectors of trackerT
L
, and bias(
L
) =
k
P
N
j2V
L

L;j
k
N
.
If one of these rules applies, the corresponding tracker will
be deleted. Since texture information in thermal wavelength
images is sparse and therefore inter-object distinction is chal-
lenging even for the human eye, we do not store information
about deleted trackers for future re-initialization.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Dataset
To the best of our knowledge, the only publicly available
high quality dataset containing thermal images is OTCBVS
[10]. However, the images are highly non-uniformly sampled
in time and thus, not suited for tracking applications.
We introduce a new dataset
1
including 4381 manually
annotated images containing humans and animals (e.g., cat,
horse), as well as background scenery. The dataset is com-
posed of 9 outdoor sequences captured at a uniform sampling
rate (20 Hz) from different viewing angles and at varying
temperatures. For the recordings, a FLIR Tau 320 thermal
camera was used (visible in Fig. 4(f)) with a 324256
resolution, which was handheld on an elevated platform
(roughly between 10-30m above ground) to replicate the top-
down viewpoints from a ﬂying UA V .
B. Evaluation Methodology
For our evaluation, we use the three sequences ‘ETHZ-
CLA”, “Sempach-7”’ and “Sempach-10” with a total of 1282
frames.
In order to train the detectors, we used a training set
containing 5578 true instances of humans with different
body and outdoor temperatures, background and poses taken
1
Our publicly available dataset can be accessed on
http://projects.asl.ethz.ch/datasets/doku.php?id=
ir:iricra2014.
1797
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1?Precision
Recall
HOG?INRIA
HOG?IR
LatentSVM?INRIA
LatentSVM?IR
LBP
BPD
Fig. 5: Sequence: “Sempach-7”. Comparison INRIA and our thermal
training sets. BPD, INRIA trained HOG and LatentSVM perform best (best
viewed in color).
from the “Sempach-8”, “Sempach-12” and other images we
recorded at different weather conditions. The whole training
set is provided online.
With A
anno
denoting the area of the annotation (ground-
truth) rectangle surrounding a human in the scene, andA
det
the area of the detection, a detection is classiﬁed as true
positive when the following holds:
A
anno
\A
det
minfA
anno
;A
det
g
 0:5: (11)
Likewise, an annotation is regarded as successfully tracked
if the position of the tracker x
mean
, deﬁned by the mean of
all the tracker particlesT
L
(m) satisﬁes x
mean
2A
anno
.
The various particle ﬁlter parameters h described in
Section II-C are trained on the “Sempach-11” sequence.
To achieve high recall rates at reasonable precisions, the
desirable performance metric of rescue personal for people
search scenarios, we formulate the optimization criteria, such
that h
max
=maxfrecall(h) + 0:2precision(h)g. Finally,
we produce Recall vs. 1-Precision plots by averaging the
results over ﬁve passes of a sequence to limit the inﬂuence
of random particle initialization and propagation addition in
the particle ﬁlter.
IV. RESULTS
To decouple the detector evaluation from the performance
of the tracker framework, we ﬁrst look at the performance of
the detectors trained on different training sets. Fig. 5 illus-
trates the relative performance of the different detectors on
the “Sempach-7” sequence. Both HOG [5] and LatentSVM
[6] perform signiﬁcantly better when trained on the INRIA
dataset [5] rather than on our thermal training set. This
can be explained by the fact that the INRIA dataset only
contains pictures of upright, standing people and with the
typical people’s height exceeding 100 px, it allows very
clear training examples on the human ﬁgure. In contrast,
our training set is far more complex due to the viewpoints
resembling those of a UA V , containing images of people from
highly oblique angles with people-heights as low as 12 px.
Detector Time per Frame (sec)
HOG 0.1054
BPD 0.0384
LatentSVM 9.6057
LBP 0.074
Our Particle Filter Framework Time per Frame (sec)
ViBe 0.0091
Particle Filter 0.0126
Rest (resizing, blobbing, etc.) 0.0023
TABLE I: Comparison of detection time per frame integrated in our particle
ﬁlter on an Intel i5 @ 3.3 GHz without substantial code optimization
on sequence “ETHZ-CLA”. The whole tracker needs the particle ﬁlter
framework and a choice of any detector.
The training stage of the detectors requires images of the
same size, which necessitates up- and down-sampling for
examples from our dataset. The segmentation of humans
from background therefore becomes less shared and hence
the magnitude of local gradients is reduced, deteriorating
the discriminanility of the SVM decision boundary. Similar
effects are caused by different viewpoint angles, where
boundaries between human and background occur at variable
pixel locations depending on which side of the camera they
appear. However, the authors of [17] suggest that training
with low resolution thermal images can still result in a robust
classiﬁer, which leads to the conclusion that the viewpoint
angle differences are more substantial to the performance
decrease.
As a result, HOG and LatentSVM are trained best on sam-
ples as they appear in the INRIA dataset, while experiencing
signiﬁcant decline in performance when humans are not seen
from a frontal view. Even from a UA V’s perspective, humans
can often be captured in a nearly frontal view, e.g. when
observed far away from a front-looking camera or if the
ground surface is signiﬁcantly inclined (e.g. in alpine rescue
scenarios). Hence, detectors trained on frontal views remain
a valid choice.
Since the LatentSVM detector is built from HOG de-
tections of different body parts and therefore the resulting
windows smaller than the whole body, the result is an even
stronger blur on the boundaries between body and back-
ground and thus, worse performance (See Fig. 5). As in the
test sequence humans are observed from various distances,
the detectors experience degradation in performance with
larger distance of humans from the camera. If the humans are
close to the camera, the LatentSVM outperforms HOG, be-
cause the necessity of appearance similarity with the training
images is reduced. However, with smaller sizes, the human
form as a whole is simpler to detect than the individual body
parts, which explains HOG overtaking LatentSVM in terms
of recall at lower precisions, hence exposing the problem of
interpolating smaller images on the detection performance of
LatentSVM.
Fig. 5 shows that the standard LBP cascade [15] cannot
compete with the INRIA-trained HOG, LatentSVM or our
BPD, reaching at most half the recall rates at any given
precision. Consequently, we focus on the integration of the
better performing INRIA-trained detectors in our particle ﬁl-
ter framework, dropping LBP cascade from further analysis.
Since processing time analysis in Table I shows that
1798
Fig. 4: The raw input image from “ETHZ-CLA” shown in (a) is fed through ViBe background segmentation to obtain (b), while (c) depicts the results of the
tracker (in brown: ROI rectangles, red: detections, green: particles of the tracker, white: velocity vector). In (d) is a typical image taken from “Sempach-7”,
while (e) is taken from “Sempach-10”. Finally, in (f) is the TAU FLIR 320 thermal camera used in our setup. The body temperature of the people w.r.t.
the environment is higher in (a), while being lower in (d) and (e) with an exception of a single person in (d) in the top right corner.
Fig. 6: From left to right: (a) human barely visible in raw image, (b) ViBe
background segmentation on (a), (c) raw image of human with lower body
temperature, and (c) raw image of human with higher body temperature. All
snippets are taken from a single frame inside the “Sempach-7” sequence.
LatentSVM is far from able to process video frames in
real-time, our further analysis focuses on the two remaining
detectors HOG and BPD. The full processing pipeline, e.g.
combining the BPD with our tracker, runs in real-time
requiring about 65 ms per image.
The “Sempach-7” sequence features humans both far away
and close to the camera (See Fig. 6). At higher precisions, the
HOG-Tracker shows far superior performance than the other
methods, roughly doubling the recall of the best detector (See
Fig. 7). Furthermore, the BPD-Tracker can increase precision
rates by a factor of two compared to the standalone BPD.
The background subtraction implemented in the tracking
framework ﬁlters out many potential false positives, thus
increasing precision. The sequence “Sempach-7” highlights
a set of challenges for our framework: with low temperature
difference between humans and their environment, the back-
ground subtraction algorithm does not segment the humans,
preventing the detector to label the region as a human and
thereby lowering the recall value. This can be observed
at lower precisions, where the detectors eventually classify
barely visible humans such as the one shown in Fig. 6(a) as
positive, while the HOG-Tracker does not.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1?Precision
Recall
BPD
HOG ? INRIA
LatentSVM? INRIA
HOG ? Tracker
BPD? Tracker
Fig. 7: Sequence: “Sempach-7”. Comparison of detection and tracking
methods. Our HOG-Tracker outperforms the detectors at high precisions by
a factor of two. Meandering can appear since the pipeline contains stochastic
elements.
In sequence “ETHZ-CLA”, people are clearly distin-
guishable from the background (a typical image shown in
Fig. 4(a)), therefore the tracker can exploit the full potential
of the background subtraction method (Fig. 4(b)) as a guid-
ance for the particles. As expected and evident from Fig. 8,
the HOG-Tracker signiﬁcantly outperforms the standalone
detector in terms of recall by at least a factor of seven
at higher precisions. The BPD-Tracker does not reach the
performance of the HOG-Tracker, but still obtains recall rates
at least twice as good as the best detector. None of the
detectors reach the performance they achieve on “Sempach-
7” illustrated in Fig. 7 since people in this sequence are
further away from the camera, hence the body shapes become
less detailed in the images, which has the greatest impact on
the LatentSVM detector.
In sequence “Sempach-10” pictured in Fig. 9, constant
1799
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1?Precision
Recall
BPD
HOG ? INRIA
LatentSVM? INRIA
HOG ? Tracker
BPD? Tracker
Fig. 8: Sequence: “ETHZ-CLA”. Comparison of detection and tracking
methods. Both trackers heavily outperform the detectors by a factor of three
respectively seven, exploiting the background subtraction algorithm.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1?Precision
Recall
 
 
BPD
HOG ? INRIA
LatentSVM ? INRIA
HOG ? Tracker
BPD ? Tracker
Fig. 9: Sequence: “Sempach-10”. Comparison of detection and tracking
methods. Both our trackers performs similar to the much slower LatentSVM
despite the heavy camera movement.
disappearance and reappearance of humans due to the heavy
swifts of the camera require regular tracker initialization and
deletion and the sequence is anyway challenging in terms of
particle location stabilization, thus lowering the tracker per-
formance. Here, the humans appear larger and LatentSVM
can proﬁt from detecting single body parts, thereby obtaining
better recall values than the other detectors. Otherwise, HOG
and BPD appear to perform roughly similar.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose a tracking algorithm based on
a particle ﬁlter combined with background subtraction for
people tracking in thermal-infrared images. We show that the
tracker is capable of locating people in different scenarios
from viewpoints such as the ones experienced by aerial
platforms used in search and rescue. Using background seg-
mentation to both reduce the detection space and to serve as
guidance, the tracker substantially increases people locating
accuracy and detection speed. We present a comprehensive
study of existing algorithms as they are applied on our
dataset. This dataset, containing thermal image sequences of
urban scenery observing humans and animals from oblique,
top-down viewpoints complete with annotations, is made
publicly available.
Future work will focus on employing a higher resolution
thermal camera to aid people detection, which remains
the bottleneck in tracking algorithms. In situations where
the contrast between people and background is low, true
detections can be disregarded by the background subtrac-
tion. Consequently a combination with additional sensing
modalities (e.g. visible-light cameras) would be necessary
to disambiguate in these cases.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to the help of Michael Burri,
Alexandra and Bruno Portmann and Carmen Schwizer for
capturing datasets.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Doll´ ar, C. Wojek, B. Schiele, and P. Perona, “Pedestrian detection:
An evaluation of the state of the art,” in IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 2011.
[2] M. Enzweiler and D. Gavrila, “Monocular pedestrian detection: Survey
and experiments,” in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 2009.
[3] M. Andriluka, S. Roth, and B. Schiele, “People-tracking-by-detection
and people-detection-by-tracking,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2008.
[4] P. Viola and M. Jones, “Rapid object detection using a boosted
cascade of simple features,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2001.
[5] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, “Histograms of oriented gradients for human
detection,” in International Conference on Computer Vision & Pattern
Recognition, 2005.
[6] P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, D. McAllester, and D. Ramanan,
“Object detection with discriminatively trained part based models,”
in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
(PAMI), 2010.
[7] A. Gaszczak, T. P. Breckon, and J. Han, “Real-time people and vehicle
detection from UA V imagery,” in Proceedings of the SPIE Conference
Intelligent Robots and Computer Vision XXVIII: Algorithms and
Techniques, 2011.
[8] M. M¨ ahlisch, M. Oberlander, O. Lohlein, D. Gavrila, and W. Ritter,
“A multiple detector approach to low-resolution ﬁr pedestrian recogni-
tion,” in Proceedings of the Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2005.
[9] K. J¨ ungling and M. Arens, “Local feature based person detection
and tracking beyond the visible spectrum,” in Machine Vision Beyond
Visible Spectrum. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, vol. 1, pp. 3–32,
ISBN: 978-3-642-11567-7.
[10] J. W. Davis and M. A. Keck, “A two-stage template approach to person
detection in thermal imagery,” in IEEE Workshop on Applications of
Computer Vision, 2005.
[11] W. Wang, J. Zhang, and C. Shen, “Improved human detection and
classiﬁcation in thermal images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), 2010.
[12] O. Barnich and M. Van Droogenbroeck, “ViBe: a powerful random
technique to estimate the background in video sequences,” in In-
ternational Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing
(ICASSP), 2009.
[13] M. Breitenstein, F. Reichlin, B. Leibe, E. Koller-Meier, and
L. Van Gool, “Online multiperson tracking-by-detection from a single,
uncalibrated camera,” in IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 2011.
[14] P. F. Felzenszwalb, R. B. Girshick, and D. McAllester, “Discrimi-
natively trained deformable part models, release 4,” http://people.cs.
uchicago.edu/

pff/latent-release4/, implemented as LatentSVM.
[15] S. Liao, X. Zhu, Z. Lei, L. Zhang, and S. Li, “Learning multi-scale
block local binary patterns for face recognition,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advances in Biometrics (ICB), 2007.
[16] Y . Freund and R. E. Schapire, “A decision-theoretic generalization
of on-line learning and an application to boosting,” in Journal of
Computer and System Sciences, 1997.
[17] F. Suard, A. Rakotomamonjy, A. Bensrhair, and A. Broggi, “Pedestrian
detection using infrared images and histograms of oriented gradients,”
in Proceedings of the Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2006.
1800
