  
? 
Abstract—In this paper, we proposed a 3D path planning 
method for a miniature robotic system, which can manipulate a 
beam of ultra-short pulse laser to cut a decayed tooth to 
formulate an expected 3D shape. Using high resolution STereo 
Lithography (STL) models of the original decayed tooth and the 
target preparing shape as the input, our method consists of a 
fast slicing algorithm and an optimized path generating 
algorithm, which realized a high efficient layer-by-layer cutting 
for laser ablation. Theoretical analysis on the geometric 
distortion and surface roughness was carried out to model the 
influence of the path planning algorithms on the accuracy of the 
prepared tooth. Experimental results on a real tooth indicate 
that the path planning method can maintain the accuracy for 
the laser ablation process. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Tooth preparing is a fundamental process of the treatment 
on dental hard tissue disease in dental clinical operations, the 
objective of which is to remove decayed tissues from a 
decayed tooth and shape the remaining normal part into an 
expected shape for further treatment. Fig. 1 shows the process 
of tooth preparing. In current clinical tooth preparing, there 
are two typical methods, namely grinding by using 
turbine-driven drills and ablation by Er:YAG or Er,Cr:YSGG 
lasers. These two methods not only have poor accuracy but 
also generate mechanical and thermal stress, thus creating 
micro cracks of several tens of microns in the enamel [1, 2]. 
These cracks are starting points for new carious attacks and 
have to be avoided for long term success of the dental 
treatment. 
Decayed  tooth Tooth preparation
Tooth 
preparing
 
Fig. 1 The process of tooth preparing 
In recent years, ultra-short pulse lasers have been 
introduced into dental surgery, and research results 
 
Lei Ma, Dangxiao Wang, Yuru Zhang and Lei Wang are with the State 
Key Lab of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, 
Beijing, 100191, China. 
*corresponding author: hapticwang@buaa.edu.cn  
Peijun Lv and Yuchun Sun are with the School and Hospital of 
Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing, China. 
demonstrated that ultra-short pulse laser can be used as a safe 
and effective tool for clinical tooth preparing [3-8]. In order to 
overcome the drawbacks of traditional treatment methods, we 
have developed a miniature robotic system for tooth 
preparing, which can manipulate a beam of ultra-short pulse 
laser to shape a target tooth into a tooth preparation [9]. Our 
long-term goal is to realize automatic tooth preparing in 
clinical operations using ultra-short laser. 
In this paper, we mainly focus on the path planning of the 
robotic system for the automatic tooth preparing operation. 
The purpose of the path planning is to generate a 3D path of 
the laser focus, which can shape a target tooth into an 
expected 3D tooth preparation. In automatic tooth preparing 
operation, a layer-by-layer cutting method is proposed to 
generate a tooth preparation, and a 3D path planning is 
developed based on this cutting method using STL models of 
the original decayed tooth and the target preparing shape, 
which mainly has two processes, slicing and path generating. 
Currently, there are some slicing algorithms and path 
generating algorithms which have been used in rapid 
prototyping field and laser cutting field. In [10], a fast slicing 
algorithm was developed based on the grouping matrix and 
the active triangle table. An algorithm for rapid slicing of ST 
L model based on sorting by triangle adjacency in layers is 
proposed, which establishes adjacency relationship between 
triangle meshes by adopting method of adjacency insertion 
[11]. P. Wen et al. proposed a fast slicing algorithm based on 
recursion and searching direct graph with weight [12]. M. Xie 
et al. developed a path generating algorithm for robot rapid 
prototype; in this algorithm, double cycling linked lists are 
used to indicate boundary of a connected region, and then the 
region will be several monotonous areas to generate 
optimized path [13]. Q. Zhao et al. provided a tool path 
generation approach for NC based on an offset method [14]. 
In automatic tooth preparing operation, the expected 
accuracy of the tooth preparation is less than 30um, so the 
resolution of the STL model should be less than 10um, which 
results in a large number of facets (more than 5?10
5
) in the 
STL Models used for the robotic system. Also, the efficiency 
of the operation is required to be less than 30min, so effective 
cutting path is required to enhance the efficiency as well. 
Meanwhile, the 3D shape of the tooth model is irregular, 
which generates complex slice contours consisting of 
multiple unconnected regions.  
3D Path Planning of a Laser Manipulation Robotic System for Tooth 
Preparing 
Lei Ma, Dangxiao Wang*, Yuru Zhang, Lei Wang, Peijun Lv, Yuchun Sun 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1922
  
Traditional 3D path planning strategies cannot be directly 
applied to the automatic tooth preparing process because of 
the reasons mentioned above. In this paper, we proposed a 
new 3D path planning strategy which consists of a new 
slicing algorithm and an optimized path generating algorithm. 
This strategy can generate an optimized laser cutting path for 
complex slice contours with fast speed and simple structure. 
Experimental results of the automatic tooth preparing validate 
the proposed path planning strategy. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In 
section II, the miniature robotic system is introduced. In 
section III, a 3D path planning strategy based on STL model 
is described, including a last slicing algorithm and an 
optimized path generating algorithm. In section IV, the 
accuracy of the path planning is analyzed, and methods are 
proposed to enhance the accuracy. In section V, automatic 
tooth preparing experiments are carried out to verify the 
performance of the proposed path planning strategy. In 
section VI, conclusion and future work are presented. 
II. LASER MANIPULATION ROBOTIC SYSTEM 
A. Laser manipulation robotic system 
As shown in Fig.2, the laser manipulation robotic system 
includes the following components: a miniature robotic 
end-effector, a tooth fixture, a laser generator, a laser 
transmission arm, a laser scanner and a computer console. 
The miniature robotics end-effector will be installed on the 
transmission arm, and then connected and fixed on the tooth 
fixture, thus maintaining no relative motion between the 
end-effector and the target tooth during tooth preparing. 
Robtic end-
effector
Fixture
Laser transmission arm
Computer console
Laser 
scanner
Laser generator
 
Fig. 2 Conceptual illustration of the automatic tooth preparing system 
In the beginning of the automatic tooth preparing operation, 
the 3D cutting path of the laser focus is first generated in the 
host computer based on the STL files of the target tooth and 
the tooth preparation, which is the key process of the 
automatic tooth preparing system. Then the tooth fixture and 
the miniature robotic end-effector are inserted into a patient’s 
oral cavity. Finally, the laser focus will be controlled by the 
robotic end-effector to track the cutting path, and shape the 
target tooth into the tooth preparation. 
B. The miniature robotic end-effector 
The function of the miniature robotic end-effector is to 
control the movement of the laser focus in three-dimensional 
space, and the robotic end-effector mainly has three 
components: an optical system, a mechanical system and a 
control system. 
As shown in fig.3, the optical system consists of a vibrating 
mirror X, a vibrating mirror Y, a protruding optical lens, and a 
reflecting mirror. When a parallel laser beam is emitted from 
a laser generator, and transferred to the scanning system 
through the transmission arm, the vibrating mirrors X, Y will 
change the beam’s direction in sequence and then sends it into 
the protruding optical lens. Passed through the lens, the beam 
becomes a focal laser, and then the focused laser reflected by 
a static mirror will exactly strike on the surface of a tooth by 
selecting an appropriate distance between the tooth and the 
lens. [9].  
f
X Y
Z
2
D
L
D
3
D
1
D
Protruding 
optical lens
Collimated 
laser beam
Vibrating 
mirror X
Vibrating 
mirror Y
Reflecting 
mirror
Tooth
 
Fig. 3 Optical components and transmission path of the laser beam 
There are three moving optical components in the 
mechanical system of the robotic end-effector, including two 
vibrating mirrors and a protruding optical lens. As shown in 
Fig.4, these three parts are driven by motors directly: the two 
vibrating mirrors are driven by pendular motors, and the 
protruding optical lens is driven by a linear motor. According 
to the layer-by-layer cutting method, the movement of the 
vibrating mirrors and the movement of the protruding optical 
lens are independent. Therefore, the vibrating mirrors and the 
protruding optical lens are controlled independently in order 
to simplify the control system of the end-effector. 
Pendular motor Y
Pendular motor X
Laser beam
Protruding optical lens
Reflecting 
mirror
Linear motor
PC
Vibrating mirror Y
D/A 
converter
RS232
USB 
DC 
driver 
board
Analog voltage driver boards
Vibrating 
mirror 
Control 
board
Vibrating mirror X
Fig.4 Mechanical system and control system of the robotic end-effector 
1923
  
C. STL models for path planning 
In order to achieve a high accuracy tooth preparation, the 
redundant tooth tissue of the target tooth needs to be removed 
accurately. Therefore, a high resolution geometric model of 
the removal tooth tissue is needed to create laser cutting path. 
As shown in Fig.5, the geometric model of the removal tooth 
tissue is obtained by subtracting the model of the tooth 
preparation with the model of the target tooth. The geometric 
model of the target tooth is achieved using a laser scanner and 
stored as STL files, and the geometric model of the tooth 
preparation is designed using Mimics (Materialise Mimics 
10.0, STL Module) based on the model of the target tooth, 
also stored as STL files. STL is a file format which describes 
the surface geometry of a three dimensional object using 
triangular facets. 
The target tooth
The tooth preparation
The removed tooth tissue
Design
1 2
1 2
_
 
Fig.5 Obtaining the geometric model of the removed tooth tissue 
D.  Safety issues 
The safety is an important part of the proposed robotic 
system, since the system is used to remove tooth tissue in oral 
cavity which has kinds of soft tissue. In this medical system, 
there are two precautions taken to ensure the safety during the 
tooth preparing process. One is using the tooth fixture, which 
is fastened to target tooth as shown in Fig.6, to fix the robotic 
end-effector, so that the position between tooth and 
end-effector can be kept unchanged, which can protect 
adjacent teeth and soft tissue of the oral cavity. Another 
precaution is using a CCD camera to monitor the tooth 
preparing process, and based on the video the camera 
provides doctors can stop the process when an emergency 
happens 
Target tooth
Tooth fixture
 
Fig. 6 No relative motion between the tooth fixture and the target tooth 
III. PATH PLANNING ALGORITHM 
In order to meet the requirements of the automatic tooth 
preparing operation, a 3D path planning strategy is proposed 
based on the layer-by-layer cutting method. The strategy 
consists of a fast slicing algorithm and an optimized path 
generating process, and the STL model used for the strategy is 
a high resolution model of the removal tooth tissue. 
A. Fast slicing algorithm 
The purpose of the slicing process is to transform a complex 
three-dimensional topography of the STL model into simple 
two-dimensional slice contours. And the path generating 
process is based on these slice contours. In previous slicing 
algorithms, a directed closed slice contour was generated 
[10,11], so it was needed to construct the topology 
relationship of the facets in STL model or sort the intersection 
points, thus limiting the efficiency of these slicing algorithms. 
In this paper, we propose a fast slicing algorithm, which can 
generate an undirected closed slice contour, simplifying the 
slicing process and improving the slicing speed. 
In the first step, all the triangle facets in the STL model are 
divided into groups, and the grouping method is as following. 
For each triangle facet, calculation is made to figure out the 
slice planes that the facet intersects with based on the 
coordinate value of the first slice plane and the spacing of the 
adjacent slice planes. In the proposed slicing algorithm, the 
spacing between two adjacent slice planes, i.e. the slice 
thickness, is equal. Then, these triangle facets which intersect 
with the same slice plane are divided into one group. Based 
on the proposed grouping method, the grouping can be 
completed by traversing all the facets only once. In each 
group, the facets are continuous because the STL model of the 
removed tooth tissue is closed. 
The next step is to generate an undirected closed slice 
contour. As shown in Fig.7, a slice plane intersects with 6 
facets, and every facet will produce an intersection segment. 
We can find that six intersection segments form an undirected 
contour line. Therefore, an undirected closed slice contour 
will be generated due to the continuity of the triangle facets in 
each facets group created in the first step. 
Triangle facet
1
2
3
4
5
6
Slice plane
Intersection 
segment
Intersection 
point
Slice contour
 
Fig.7 The diagram of generating slice contour 
B. Optimized path generating algorithm 
The optimized path generating process is carried out based 
on these slice contours created in the slicing process. Filling 
lines are first used to calculate laser cutting points. In this 
paper, we assume that the filling lines are parallel to the Y 
axis. As the slice contour consists of a large number of 
unordered segments, the calculation method is proposed as 
follow. For each segment, the first step is to figure out the 
filling line that the segment intersects with based on the 
1924
  
coordinate value of the first filling line and the spacing of the 
adjacent filling lines. Then the intersection point will be 
calculated, and all the intersect points will be stored in a 
points list at last.  
 The second step is to sort the intersection points to generate 
laser cutting lines. As shown in Fig.8, there are three regions 
in a slice contour: region 1 is a cutting region which will be 
filled with laser cutting path, while region 2 and region 3 are 
not cutting regions. It is clear that the number of the 
intersection points on a single filling line is an even number, 
and lines from the odd point to the even point is the laser 
cutting path. According to the analysis above, the sorting 
method is illustrated as follow: all the intersection points are 
sorted based on the X value of the points in the ascending 
order. Then, for these intersection points whose 
corresponding filling line is the same one, they are sorted 
again based on the Y value of the points in the ascending 
order. After the sorting process, a new points list is created, 
the line segments between the 2m-1(m is an integer and larger 
than zero) point and the 2m point are the laser cutting lines, 
and all the laser cutting lines are continuous. 
A
F
I
4
5
Y
X
o
1
2
3
Filling line Intersection point 
B
C
D
E
G
H
Region division line
1
1
1
1
 
Fig.8 The diagram of the filling lines intersecting with slice contour 
The third step is to generate optimized laser cutting path. As 
shown in Fig.8, the cutting region 1 is divided into several 
small cutting areas (A~ I) depending on the different number 
of intersection points of a single filling line. Area A, B, C, D 
and E consist of the laser cutting lines which are formed by 
the first intersection point and the second point on the same 
filling line, so these five areas are continuous. Area F, G and 
H are formed by the third intersection point and the fourth 
point, and I area is formed by the fifth point and the sixth 
point. So an optimized laser cutting path is generated from 
area A to area I in alphabetical order as shown in Fig.9 based 
on the following principle: The laser path lines formed by the 
first intersection point and the second point on the same 
filling line are cut firstly, then the laser path lines formed by 
the third intersection point and the fourth point. And continue 
this process until all the laser cutting lines are traversed. And 
lines between two areas are jumping lines. 
Turning point
Cutting line
 
Fig.9 The optimized laser cutting path of a slice contour 
 As shown in Fig.9, there are lots of turning points in the 
path, and the motors that drive the reflecting mirrors must 
slow down and change rotational direction at the turning point 
so that the laser beam can reach the turning point exactly. 
Meanwhile, the mirrors have inertia, which mean that the 
mirrors should need a delay in order to move accurately. 
Therefore, the mirrors need a delay called inflexion delay to 
change rotational direction and reach the turning points 
accurately in general application, which results in increasing 
the total time of tooth preparing process. In future work, this 
issue will be discussed. 
ACCURACY AND ROUGHNESS OF THE PATH PLANNING 
In clinical tooth preparing operation, the shape accuracy of 
the final prepared tooth includes two requirements: the linear 
error is required to be less than 0.1mm, and the error of the 
convergence angle 
[15]
 is required to be less than 2~5° [16]. 
These two parameters are main evaluation indicators to judge 
the quality of the tooth preparation. Meanwhile, the surface of 
the tooth preparation is required to be smooth. In the 
automatic tooth preparing automatic operation, path planning 
directly determines the accuracy of the tooth preparation, so 
the accuracy of the path planning is analyzed in this section. 
The layer-by-layer cutting method is employed in the 
automatic tooth preparing operation, so multistep-like 
behavior will be generated inevitably as shown in Fig.10. The 
multistep-like behavior will cause the geometric distortion of 
a tooth preparation and influence the surface roughness. 
Expected tooth preparation
The removed tooth tissue
STL model of the target tooth Actual tooth preparation
The removed tooth tissue
Actual tooth preparation
Layer-by layer cutting method
 
Fig.10 Multistep-like behavior created by the layer-by-layer cutting method 
C. Geometric distortion 
Geometric distortion generated by multistep-like behavior, 
mainly influencing the linear error, has relationship with the 
slicing thickness, the slicing direction and the normal vector 
of the model surface. Smaller slice thickness and smaller 
1925
  
acute angle between the slicing direction and the normal 
vector of the model surface can reduce the geometric 
distortion. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig.11, the actual tooth 
preparation will be inscribed in the expected tooth 
preparation if the angle between the slicing direction and the 
normal vector of the model surface is obtuse, and the actual 
tooth preparation will be larger than the expected tooth 
preparation if the angle between the slicing direction and the 
normal vector of the model surface is acute as well.  
Slice contours Target tooth
Expected tooth preparation
Steps
Slice direction
Actual tooth prepartion
Normal vector of the surface
 
Fig.11 Geometric distortion caused by the slicing direction and the normal 
vector of the model surface 
In order to evaluate the geometric distortion, the volume 
distortion degree is used as a key indicator. The equation of 
the volume distortion degree can be derived as 
                                  
r
v
stl
V
k
V
? (1) 
where 
stl V
is the volume of the expected tooth preparation, and
r V is the volume of the actual tooth preparation. The volume 
of the actual preparation is calculated based on the equation 
1
                               (2)
n
ri
i
V S h
?
??
?
 
where i S is the area of the cutting region in a slice contour 
and can be obtained on the basis of the path generating 
process, and 
h ?
 
is the selected slice thickness in the slicing 
process.
  
D. Surface roughness 
Multistep-like behavior can create steps on the surface of 
the actual tooth preparation, and these steps have a bad effect 
on the surface roughness of the actual tooth preparation. In 
automatic tooth preparing operation, the surface roughness 
mainly depends on the height of the steps. The higher the steps 
are, the larger the surface roughness will be. Fig.12 shows the 
diagram of the surface of the actual tooth preparation. A step 
AB generates a surface peak at A point and a surface valley B 
point by the surface middle line, and the distance between A 
point and the surface middle line will be the height of the 
surface peak. Therefore, p Z , the height of the surface peak at A 
point, can be calculated using the equation: 
cos                                (3)
2
p
h
Z ?
?
??
 
where h ? is the height of the step, and? is the angle between 
the normal vector of the surface at A point and Z axis.  
Ideal surface
Surface middle line
Step
?
/2 h ?
Valley
Peak
p Z
A
B
Normal vector
Z
Peak
Peak
Peak
Valley
Valley
Valley
 
Fig.12 The surface of the actual tooth preparation 
From the equation (3), we can conclude that the surface 
roughness of the actual tooth preparation depends on the 
height of the steps h ? and the angle? . For the surface of the 
tooth, the range of the angle? is from 0? to 90? . Therefore, 
the maximum step height of the surface peak on the surface of 
the tooth preparation is /2 h ? , so the surface roughness of 
the tooth preparation is not more than /2 h ? . 
E. Methods to the improve the accuracy and roughness 
Based on the analysis above, the height of the steps, the 
slicing direction and the normal vector of the tooth surface are 
the key factors which influence the geometric distortion and 
the surface roughness. For a particular tooth, the normal 
vector of its surface is a fixed value. Therefore, the other 
factors are studied to improve the accuracy of the tooth 
preparation. 
Since the height of the steps not only influences the 
geometric distortion but also determines the surface 
roughness, the accuracy will be improved if the height of the 
steps can be reduced. In the laser tooth preparation system, 
the height of the steps is equal to the selected slice thickness, 
so smaller slice thickness can be set to reduce the step height 
theoretically. However, smaller slice thickness will cause the 
protruding optical lens to move frequently, and the 
cumulative error of the motion control will also increase, thus 
reducing the efficiency and accuracy of the tooth preparing 
process. In the robotic end-effector, the focal distance of the 
lens that used in the device is 157mm, which results in the 
focal length to be 1mm, and we found that the removal 
thickness of monolayer remains almost the same around 
100um of the focal plane. According to experimental data, the 
removal thickness of monolayer is about 10um (laser power is 
3w, cutting speed is 169mm/s, repetition frequency is 10 
KHz). Based on these features, a method is first proposed to 
reduce the height of the steps, despite the influence and the 
efficiency requirements: the slice thickness is set to the 
monolayer cutting depth, and the protruding optical lens 
moves once after a certain number of the slice contours are 
cut. The moving length of the optical lens at every time 
should be less than 100um, so the certain number can be 
calculated. 
While the slice direction has a bad effect on the geometric 
distortion no matter what the slice direction is, a 
compensation method is proposed in order to reduce the 
1926
  
effect of the slice direction on geometric distortion as shown 
in Fig.13. In this method, the coordinate value of the first slice 
plane will add or subtract a compensation amount based on 
the selected slice direction, and the compensation amount is 
half of the slice thickness. Obviously, this method can reduce 
the geometric distortion. 
Steps
Slice contours Target tooth
Ideal tooth preparation Real tooth prepartion
Compensation 
amount
 
Fig.13 A compensation method for the slice direction 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
In this section, experiments were carried out to verify the 
performance of the proposed 3D path planning strategy. As 
shown in Fig.14, an experiment platform was established: a 
laser beam was emitted from the laser generator, and then the 
laser beam stroked the vibrating mirror X horizontally, and 
finally the laser bean would be a focal laser on the surface of 
an experimental material which was fixed on a 
three-dimensional translation stage. The laser generator is a 
picosecond laser (Maximum output power 10w, maximum 
repetition frequency 10 kHz, pulse width 15ps, wavelength 
1064ns).  
Laser generator
Laser path
Robotic end-effector
Dentin slice
Dentin 
slice
 
Fig.14 Experiment platform 
Generally, it is hard to find the exact location of the focus 
because the focal length is too long. In the experiments, we 
moved the translation stage manually at low power. And then 
we measured the diameter of the laser focus to be 33.8um. 
A. Cutting Experiment of 2D slice contours 
At first, a cutting experiment of 2D slice contour was 
carried out to verify the optimized path generating algorithm. 
The experiment was designed to cut two complex 
two-dimensional slice graphics on a colored hard paper. The 
distance between two adjacent filling lines was set to 33.8um 
in order to ensure the zero overlapping ratio of the cutting 
lines, and the scanning speed is also set to 338mm/s. 
Experimental results are shown in Fig.15, we can find that the 
whole cutting areas are scanned entirely without missing lines, 
so we can conclude that the optimized path generating 
algorithm is correct. 
Slicing process
Optimal path 
generating process
Cutting experiment 
using colored paper
 
Fig.15 Results of cutting experiment of 2D slice contours 
B. Automatic tooth preparing experiment 
The tooth tissue is not homogeneous with multiple 
components like enamel and dentin, and this unevenness may 
affect the verification. In order to reduce the tooth’s 
non-homogeneity effect, the tooth used in this experiment 
was preprocessed to remove the enamel and retain the dentin 
as the experiment material. 
In this experiment, the first step was to achieve the 
monolayer cutting depth of the dentin under the specific laser 
parameter. As shown in Fig.16, we designed a cutting method: 
there were five slice contours which were rings with different 
diameters, and each slice contour was cut five times from the 
largest one to the smallest one, and finally a circular cone 
with steps was generated. The optical lens remained still in 
the whole process. After ablation, we measured the height of 
every step, and then got the average height of the five steps, 
which was five times of the monolayer cutting depth. In this 
experiment, the laser parameters (output power 3.0w, 
repetition frequency 10 kHz) were selected for this 
experiment, and the cutting speed were 169mm/s. The 
average height of the five steps achieved in the experiments is 
46um, which means the monolayer cutting depth of the dentin 
is 9.2um. 
Before cutting After cutting
 Cutting method
 
Fig.16 A cutting method is proposed to achieve the monolayer cutting depth 
Based on the monolayer cutting depth, a tooth preparing 
experiment based on dentin was carried out. The slicing 
thickness was set to 9.2um, and the number of slicing plane 
was set to 500, so the target depth should be 4600um. The 
1927
  
target convergence angle of the expected tooth preparation 
was 16.38° . A single feed amount of the optical lens was set 
to 46um according to the five times of the monolayer cutting 
depth, i.e., the lens would move once after the laser cut five 
slice contours. 
As shown in Fig.17, a tooth preparation was generated in 
the experiment. The time of the experiment is 3.5 hours. The 
actual convergence angle is 15.86° , so the angular error is 
0.5° . As shown in Fig.18, model matching was carried out to 
measure the three-dimensional shape error using the STL 
models of the actual tooth preparation and the expected tooth 
preparation. According to the measurement, the maximum 
error is 0.145mm, and the average error is 0.05mm. 
Tooth slice before experiment Tooth preparation
 
Fig.17 A tooth preparation generated in the experiment 
Actual tooth preparation Expected tooth preparation Model matching
 
Fig.18 Model matching to measure the accuracy of the tooth preparation  
From the result of the laser tooth experiment, we can 
conclude that the proposed 3D path planning method can 
generate a target tooth preparation. Meanwhile, some 
problems need to be solved in the future work. Firstly, the 
maximum three-dimensional shape error of the actual tooth 
preparation is 0.145mm and larger than 0.1mm, which does 
not perfectly meet the tooth preparing requirement. Besides, 
the current ablation efficiency is too low, relative to the 
expected time half an hour, so more powerful laser generator 
and more efficient ablation method are required in future to 
improve the efficiency issue. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on high resolution STL models of the original 
decayed tooth and the target preparing shape, a 3D path 
planning strategy was proposed for automatic tooth preparing 
operation in this paper, including a fast slicing algorithm and 
an optimized path generating algorithm. In the fast slicing 
algorithm, an undirected closed slice contour was generated 
to substitute a directed closed slice contour which generated 
by traditional slicing algorithm, and thus to improve the 
efficiency of the slicing process. In the proposed optimized 
path generating algorithm, lines filling method is used to 
achieve the laser cutting lines, and an optimized path is 
generated by dividing a complex slice contour into small 
independent areas. Finally, experiments were designed to 
evaluate the performance of the 3D path planning strategy, 
and results indicated that the strategy is correct and feasible to 
generate a tooth preparation on a target tooth. Limitations and 
future work are also put forward according to the automatic 
tooth preparing experiment results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the National Key Technology 
R&D Program of China under the grant No. 2012BAI07B04, 
and by the National Natural Science Foundation of China 
under the grant No. 61170187. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Wigdor, J. T. Walsh, and S. R. Visuri. “Dental material ablation with 
the Er: YAG laser,” Lasers and Electro-Optics Society Annual Meeting, 
1994, LEOS'94 Conference Proceedings. IEEE. Vol. 2: 73-74. 
[2] A. Aoki, I. Ishikawa, T. Yamada, M. Otsuki, H. Watanabe, et al., 
“Comparison between Er: YAG laser and conventional technique for 
root caries treatment in vitro,” Journal of dental research 77.6 (1998): 
1404-1414. 
[3] B. Schwab, D. Hagner, W. Mü ller, H. Lubatschowski, T. Lenarz, and R. 
Heermann, “Bone ablation using ultra-short laser pulses. A new 
technique for middle ear surgery,” Laryngo-rhino-otologie, 83.4 (2004): 
219-225. 
[4] J. Krü ger, W. Kautek, H. Newesely, “Femtosecond-pulse laser ablation 
of dental hydroxyapatite and single-crystalline fluoroapatite,” Applied 
Physics A, 1999, 69(1): S403-S407. 
[5] J. Serbin, T. Bauer, C. Fallnich, “Femtosecond lasers as novel tool in 
dental surgery”, applied surface science, 2002, 197: 737-740. 
[6] R. F. Z. Lizarelli, M. M. Costa, E. Carvalho-Filho, “Selective ablation 
of dental enamel and dentin using femtosecond laser pulses,” Laser 
Physics Letters, 2008, 5(1): 63-69. 
[7] A. Daskalova, S. Bashir, W. Husinsky, “Morphology of ablation craters 
generated by ultra-short laser pulses in dentin surfaces: AFM and 
ESEM evaluation,” Applied Surface Science, 2010, 257(3): 1119-1124.  
[8] J.F. Kraft, K. Vestentoft, B.H. Christensen, et al, “Calculus removal on 
a root cement surface by ultra-short laser pulses”, Applied Surface 
Science, 2008, 254(7): 1895-1899. 
[9] L. Wang, D.X. Wang, L.Ma, Y.R. Zhang, F.S. Yuan, et al., 
“Preliminary experiments of a miniature robotic system for tooth 
ablation using ultra-short pulsed lasers,” Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. IEEE, 
2013: 2566-2571. 
[10] Y. Wu, B. Zhao, and S. Wang, “Algorithm for rapid slicing STL model,” 
Journal of Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 4 (2004): 
329-333. 
[11] S. Wang, H. Liu, and X. Zhu, “An Algorithm for Rapid Slicing of STL 
Model Based on Sorting by Triangle,” Jour n al of Computer Aided 
Design & Computer Graphics 21.4 (2001): 600-606 
[12] P.Z. Wen, W.M. Huang, and C.K. Wu, “Modified fast algorithm for 
STL file slicing,” Journal of Computer Applications 28 (2008): 
1766-1768. 
[13] M. Xie, C. Li, Z. Shao, “The Section-filling and Path Plan on the Robot 
Rapid Prototype (RRP),” Machine Design and Research 3 (2000): 007. 
[14] Q.S. Zhao, X.H. Huang, Chao Wang, et al, “NC tool path generation 
approach based on STL,” IT in Medicine and Education (ITME), 2011 
International Symposium on. IEEE, 2011, 2: 228-231. 
[15] S. Mou, T. Chai, J. Wang, and Y. Shiau, “Influence of different 
convergence angles and tooth preparation heights on the internal 
adaptation of Cerec crowns," The Journal of prosthetic dentistry 87.3 
(2002): 248-255. 
[16] J. Xu, J. Yuan, Z. Wang, “Prosthetic dentistry,” Beijing, People's 
Military Surgeon Press, 2001.4 (In Chinese). 
1928
