Combining Energy and Power based Safety Metrics in Controller Design for
Domestic Robots
Tadele Shiferaw Tadele, Theo J.A. de Vries, and Stefano Stramigioli
Abstract— This paper presents a general passivity based
interaction controller design approach that utilizes a combined
energy and power based safety norms to assert safety of
domestic robots. Since these robots are expected to co-habit
the same environment with a human user, analysing and
ensuring their safety is an important requirement. Safety
analysis of domestic robots determine whether a robot achieves
a desired safety level according to some quantitative safety
metrics. When it comes to controller design for human friendly
robots, it often involves introducing compliance and ensuring
asymptotic stability using impedance control technique and
passivity theories. The controller proposed in this work also uses
a passive design that extends the standard impedance control
scheme with energy and power based safety metrics to ensure
that safety requirements deﬁned in these norms are achieved
by domestic robots. The effectiveness of the proposed guideline
is illustrated with simulation and experimental results.
Index Terms— Domestic Robots, Impedance Control, Safety
Metric, Passivity Based Control, PD, Interaction Control
I. INTRODUCTION
Recent advances in the robotics ﬁeld have accelerated the
development of domestic robots that can operate as assistants
in home or ofﬁce activities. Safety of these robots is of
paramount importance because the robots operate in a human
present environment. A standard safety analysis in robotics is
done by using a risk based method that involves the following
three steps: (1) risk assessment; (2) risk elimination and
reduction; (3) validation and veriﬁcation [1]. The ﬁrst two
steps are used to identify risks, deﬁne possible injuries and
suggest design solutions that can minimize or if possible
eliminate the risks. The ﬁnal validation step deﬁnes qualita-
tive or quantitative safety norms that can be used to evaluate
safety of the robotic system.
These norms consist of safety criteria that should be
met to achieve safer systems as well as quantitative safety
metrics that are used evaluate results of a safety modiﬁcation
and assist accreditation procedures. Domestic robots also
require meaningful norms to evaluate their safety before they
can be successfully deployed around human users. For a
complex system like a domestic robot, there are a number of
risks and injuries that demand several safety metrics, each
dealing with a speciﬁc risk. In this publication, we will
only consider collision risks together with the injuries and
safety metrics related with them. There are different safety
This work was supported by funds from the Netherlands Ministry of
Economic Affairs under research project Bobbie.
The authors are with the Robotics and Mechatronics chair at the Faculty
of Electrical Engineering, Mathematics and Computer Science, Univer-
sity of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands. E-mail: ft.s.tadele,
t.j.a.deVries, s.stramigiolig@utwente.nl
metrics that deal with collision injuries and they consider
acceleration, force, energy or power as a main parameter
for the safety analysis. Though these metrics are essential in
identifying and analysing possible injuries, their exploitation
in controller design has been minimal in literature. Control
schemes that incorporate safety norms in their design identify
an appropriate metric and propose solutions that guarantee
safety either by using a pure control action or modifying the
reference trajectory input to the controller [2], [3], [4].
Domestic robots are designed to operate in an unstructured
environment and also to interact with unknown objects. Thus,
the controller design in domestic robots should incorporate
safety issues such as ensuring asymptotic stability even dur-
ing interaction, introducing compliance to minimize injury
in case of uncontrolled impact and providing robustness to
parametric and modeling uncertainty. Different authors have
exploited passivity theories in the control law design to
guarantee asymptotically stability of domestic robots [5], [6].
Passive systems are stable dynamic systems whose bounded
total energy can be used to prove Lyapunov stability even
during interaction with unknown passive environment [7].
The safety demand for a compliant robotic manipulator is
achieved using an impedance control technique which allows
modiﬁcation of the dynamic characteristic of a manipulator
to achieve a desirable compliant behaviour [8]. Impedance
control is an interaction control scheme in which an energetic
bidirectional signal exchange between the controller and the
plant results in a desired dynamic behavior of the system [9].
With a general goal of detecting and avoiding unsafe con-
ditions via control action, this work presents a novel control
scheme that incorporates safety metrics in impedance control
design. The control scheme begins with a basic impedance
controller tuned according to a certain performance require-
ment [10], [11] and then modiﬁes the controller parameters
so that safety limits deﬁned in a combined energy and power
based metrics are met. This variable impedance controller
is realized using an energy tank based implementation to
guarantee the passivity and energy consistency of the system.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II safety
norms used to address collision risks in domestic robots
are brieﬂy presented and previous works regarding controller
design using these safety norms are reviewed. Then section
III discusses details of the proposed combined safety norm
and controller design. Section IV presents simulation and
experimental results before section V summarizes the main
ideas and presents the conclusions.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1209
II. BACKGROUND
A. Safety Metrics in Domestic Robotics
The most common safety metric in domestic robotics is
the Head Injury Criteria (HIC) which is also used in biome-
chanics study and accident researches. Human biomechanics
data deﬁned in the Wayne State Concussion Tolerance Curve
is the basis of this safety metric and it is computed by using
measured acceleration of a human head due to an impact
[12]. Mathematically it is given as,
HIC
t
= t
"
1
t
Z
t
0
a()d
#
2:5
(1)
where a() is the head acceleration measured in function
of g and t is measurement duration which is often taken
as 15ms to investigate head concussions. Though HIC is a
standard metric in the automotive industry and is also used
in the robotics domain, different authors have suggested that
it is not an adequate metric in domestic robotics because of
differences in operating velocity and injury types between
the automotive and robotics domain [13], [14]. It was also
reported that due to the low operating velocity of robots, even
the heaviest of robots are deemed safe for humans according
to HIC measurements [15].
In addition to HIC, other approximations were proposed to
ﬁt the Wayne State Tolerance data and one of them suggests
reducing the power in equation (1) from 2.5 to 2 [16].
Accordingly, the ﬁnal equation becomes
f = ta
ave
2
(2)
f =
V
2
t
(3)
wherea
ave
is the average acceleration and V is the change
in velocity of the head.
From this physically interpretable equation, possible injury
to a human head is identiﬁed to be proportional to the rate of
kinetic energy transferred during impact. This rate of energy
transfer was previously suggested as an injury measure of
constrained organs in the viscous criterion safety metric [17].
The viscous criterion proposes that injury to human organs is
proportional to the product of the compression and the rate
of compression. Based on the observation from equation (3),
a power based safety metric known as Head Impact Power
(HIP) was proposed to analyze head injuries [16]. The metric
uses the probability of a concussion injury from an impact
on a human head to identify the minimum power that can
cause injury to a human head. According to the experiments,
the power limits identiﬁed are
P
limit
=
(
12KW for frontal impacts
10KW for non-frontal impacts
(4)
Another class of safety norms used in domestic robots
considers excessive force as the cause of injuries and use
the maximum allowed force that can be exerted by the robot
as an appropriate safety norm in domestic robots. Since the
allowed tolerance limits for different body parts are not the
same, it was suggested that the smallest force tolerance,
which is the tolerance to neck injuries, be chosen as an
operating limit [18]. In addition to the maximum limits, other
force based metrics were also introduced to address safety
of domestic robots. A unitless danger index deﬁned as the
ratio of force exerted by a manipulator to the maximum
allowed force limit was suggested as a safety metric for
mechanical and control system design of manipulators [19].
The maximum impact force that can be exerted by a multi
DOF manipulator was used to deﬁne another force based
safety metric called impact potential  in [2]. The impact
potential is deﬁned mathematically as,
 = sup
p2P

p
(5)
where
p
is worst case impact forces at contact pointp on the
surface of the robot and P is the set of all possible surface
contact points.
Energy based injury analysis that could be used in robotics
were obtained from two experimental investigations that
identiﬁed the minimum amount of energy that is required to
cause failure of cranial bones and fracture of the neck bones
in [20] and [21] respectively. The energy limit on cranial
bone failure can be used to analyse safety during collision
with a clamped human user while unclamped collisions,
where the neck is free to move and bend after a collision
on the head, could be evaluated based on neck fracturing
energy limit. These results can then be combined to give a
complete energy based safety norm for domestic robots in
both cases of clamped or unclamped impacts.
E
limit
=
8
>
<
>
:
517J adult cranium bone failure
127J infant cranium bone failure
30J neck fracture
(6)
B. Safety Metrics in Controller Design
While addressing the issue of human friendly robots that
should meet a deﬁned safety and performance requirements,
[3] used HIC as a safety criteria to identify a performance
limit given in terms of maximum allowed link velocity.
Hence one control objective is to guarantee that the desired
trajectories of the manipulator confers to the safety imposed
velocity limitation. The achievable trade-off between safety
and performance was evaluated for different actuation mech-
anisms and possible controller schemes for variable stiffness
actuated manipulators were suggested.
After introducing impact potential  as a safety norm,
authors in [2] proposed an Impact Potential Controller design
which ensures that impact potential of a manipulator is within
a safe limit. The proposed controller possesses a hierarchical
implementation with low level motion controller and higher
level safety protection layer. The motion controller generates
required torque output to achieve a desired motion trajectory
and the safety layer checks the impact potential that will
be achieved due to the motion controller torque. If the
impact potential is within the safe limit it is passed onto the
manipulator and if not the torque is clipped to an appropriate
value to avoid possible unsafe collisions.
1210
[4] used energy based safety norms discussed in the
previous subsection II-A to design an energy regulation
controller that limits the total energy of a manipulator within
the required safety limit. Taking a ﬂexible manipulator driven
by a series elastic actuator, the controller monitors the kinetic
and potential energy of the manipulator and attempts to
limit the overall energy of the system remains within the
acceptable level. An inner position controller drives the
manipulator while the energy regulation controller monitors
energy content and modulates the desired trajectory reference
to achieve acceptable energy level.
III. PROPOSED CONTROLLER DESIGN
Noting the presence of a direct interaction between a con-
troller and a plant, analysing controllers as dynamic systems
that can inﬂuence the plant to achieve a desired system
behaviour expands the controller design technique beyond
the classical signal based design [22]. This control design
approach grants an insightful view of the system, simpliﬁes
tuning and allows an overall stability analysis by using the
total energy as a Lyapunov function. Consider a simpliﬁed
1-DOF robotic manipulator modeled as a massm at position
x and it is to be moved to a desired position x
d
, a simple
physical controller that can achieve the required behaviour
consists of a spring connected between the desired virtual
point and the mass, See Fig 1. A damper is then added to
achieve an asymptotically stable system. Finally the overall
system behaves like a mass-spring-damper whose behaviour
can be shaped by adjusting the controller parameters.
b
Reference + Controller Plant
Interaction
Fig. 1. Impedance controlled system.
The resulting control system is a conventional PD con-
troller that guarantees closed loop stability for any positive
gains, with the proportional term representing the spring and
the derivative term representing the damper. In addition to
placing the object at the desired position in a stable way,
a desired system compliance and dynamic behaviour that
meets performance requirements can be set by choosing an
appropriate value for the controller stiffness and damping
parameters k
co
and b
o
.
In addition to its passive nature and the compliance it adds
in the system, this impedance controller with unmodiﬁed
driving point inertia can be more human-friendly by incor-
porating a safety metric in its design to minimize possible
injuries. Further more, by combining safety metrics that
address different injuries, the controller can be designed with
increased safety coverage over multiple risks. In this paper,
both energy and power based metrics were used to enhance
safety against possible injuries addressed by these metrics.
The physically interpretable impedance controller design
belongs to a class of energy shaping controllers whose energy
content is analysed during design [22]. Given the impedance
controlled system shown in Fig 1, total energy of the overall
system is the sum of the kinetic energy of the plant and the
potential energy of the controller spring. It is given as
E
tot
=
1
2
k
c
x
e
2
+
1
2
m _ x
2
(7)
wherex
e
=x
d
 x is the motion error which is equal to the
state of the controller spring and _ x is velocity of the plant.
So at any instant, given measured plant position, plant
velocity and desired position, the overall energy of the
system can be limited to a maximum allowed limit E
max
by adjusting the stiffness of the controller spring k
c
. As a
result the controller stiffness parameter can be written as,
k
c
=
8
>
<
>
:
k
co
if E
tot
E
max
2E
max
 m _ x
2
(x
d
 x)
2
if E
tot
>E
max
(8)
Once the safe energy restrictions are ensured by the
stiffness choice, the maximum power that the manipulator
can transfer to a human during collision can be limited via
a control action since the controller is the source of the
power that will be transferred to a human during contact.
This power restriction can be enforced in the controller
by modifying the dissipative damping parameter of the
controller. That is, given the impedance characteristic of the
controller which accepts velocity input and outputs a force,
the power conjugate of velocity, the power ﬂowing from the
controller to the plant P
c
becomes,
P
c
= (k
c
(x
d
 x) b _ x) _ x (9)
Then for a ﬁxed controller stiffness k
c
, the power ﬂow
between the plant and controller can be limited to maximum
value P
cmax
by adjusting the damping parameter b as fol-
lows,
b =
8
<
:
b
o
ifP
c
P
cmax
k
c
(x
d
 x) _ x P
cmax
_ x
2
ifP
c
>P
cmax
(10)
Thus, when unwanted energy is identiﬁed in the system the
controller drains energy by being more compliant and when
unsafe power output is detected the controller increases the
damping on its output. With the appropriate parameters iden-
tiﬁed using equations (8) and (10), the impedance controller
implementation can be written mathematically as,
F
c
=k
c
 (x
d
 x) b _ x (11)
Note that for a controller that is interacting with a plant
via energy exchange, direct implementation of this controller
with variable stiffness and damping parameters for improved
safety contradicts with energetically consistent interaction
controller design. That is, under constant parameter con-
troller implementation, its energy based interaction with the
plant dictates that if the energy content of the controller de-
creases, the same energy ﬂows to the plant and if the energy
1211
content of the controller increases then it means energy is
extracted from the plant. Furthermore, the modiﬁcation of
the stiffness parameter allows internal production of energy
in the controller and results in loss of its passivity property.
To avoid this problem we propose to implement the
controller using an energy tank based approach where a
controller is designed as a power ﬂow modulator between an
energy storage tank and a plant. See Fig 2. This controller
is also physically interpretable and consists of an energy
storage tankCS which behaves like a spring with a stiffness
value of 1, a modulated transmission MT and a compu-
tational unit CU as shown in Fig. 2. The computational
unit calculates a modulating factor u which determines how
power ﬂows between the storage element CS and the plant.
If u = 0 the storage tank and the plant will be isolated with
no energy exchange between them. As the complete system
is an interconnection of energy converting transformation
element and intrinsically passive mass and spring elements,
it is passive by construction. Without interactions its total
energy is bounded and its stability is guaranteed as long as
it is interacting with passive systems.
CU u
1
CS
MT
Reference + Controller Plant
Fig. 2. Energy tank based controller design.
The port Hamiltonian equation of the tank based system
shown in Fig 2 above can be written as

_ s
_ p

=

0 u
 u 0

s
p=m

(12)
,where s is state of the spring like storage CS which is
equal to its force output, p is the momentum of the plant
and p=m = _ x is velocity of the plant.
Using the second half of equation (12), any desired
impedance controller output force F
c
can be exerted on the
plant by choosing the desired modulating factor u
d
as
u
d
=
 F
c
s
(13)
In order to ensure energetic passivity of the controller,
the parameter u should ensure that power ﬂows from the
storage tank CS to the plant only if there is minimum
available energy remaining in the tank. Thus, the modulating
parameter u is ﬁnally implemented as
u =
(
0 if ((H(CS)<)^ (P
c
> 0))
 Fc
s
otherwise
(14)
whereF
c
is desired output controller torque,H(CS) =
1
2
s
2
is energy in the tank,  is the minimum energy required in
the tank for power to ﬂow towards the plant and Pc =F
c
_ x
is the power ﬂowing from the controller to the plant.
IV. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Simulation Results
In order to validate the controller design method proposed
in the previous section, a simulation was performed on a
computer model plant with a link mass of m = 1[Kg]. To
achieve a desired performance requirement and a critically
damped dynamic behaviour, the impedance controller param-
eters were chosen as k
co
= 100N=m and b
o
= 20Ns=m
respectively. As a proof of concept, the allowed safe energy
limit is set to E
max
= 6J and the maximum allowed
power that ﬂows from the controller is set to P
cmax
= 4W .
Simulation results in Fig 3 and 4 show that the system was
able to reach its desired position while the controller adjusted
its parameters to ensure the energy of impedance controlled
system as well as the power ﬂow from the controller to the
plant stayed within the allowed limits.
Fig. 3. Simulation results - Trajectory tracking
Fig. 4. Simulation results - Total energy of impedance controlled system
Etot , power ﬂow from the controller to the plantPc , stiffness of the system
kc , damping ratio b and output force from controller Fc
1212
The controller designed resulted in an intuitive control
action which can be physically interpreted. As can be seen
from Fig 4, as soon as the power restriction limit is reached
the controller increased its damping to oppose the spring
action and lower the force transmitted from the controller.
Then the energy limit was reached and the stiffness was
lowered resulting in a further decrease of the controller
output. At this instant the damper doesn’t have a strong
spring action to counter so it was lowered accordingly.
B. Experimental Results
In order to investigate practical implementation of the
proposed tuning method, two experiments were performed on
a 1-DOF manipulator with link inertia ofJ = 0:0069Kgm
2
shown in Fig 5.
Fig. 5. A 1 D.O.F experimental setup used
On the ﬁrst experiment a contact free trajectory tracking
experiment was performed with maximum allowed energy
limit of E
max
= 0:05J and power limit of P
cmax
=
0:1W used as safety criteria limits. The initial stiffness
and damping ratio of the controller were chosen, based
on a performance requirement, as k
c
= 3:5Nm=rad and
b = 0:17Nms=rad. As seen from the experimental results
shown in Fig 6 and 7, the controller was able to position the
plant at the desired position while keeping the safety limits
by modifying its compliance and damper parameters.
In order to evaluate performance variations due to the
safety criteria imposed on the system, the free motion
experiment was done using a constant parameter impedance
controller of k
c
= 3:5Nm=rad and b = 0:17Nms=rad
and its result was compared with safety limited variable
impedance controller. The two controllers have similar per-
formance under normal condition and when the safety aware
controller became more compliant to keep the limits, an
increase in motion tracking error was observed. See Fig 8.
Fig. 6. Experimental results - Interaction free trajectory tracking
Fig. 7. Experimental results (Free motion) - Total energy of impedance
controlled system Etot , power ﬂow from the controller to the plant Pc ,
stiffness of the systemkc , damping ratiob and controller torque outputc
Fig. 8. Experimental results - Motion Error using an impedance controller
with and without safety requirements
Soft obstacle 
collision
Human 
Interaction
Fig. 9. Collision and interaction experiment
On the next experiment the controller action was evaluated
during collision with a soft obstacle and interaction with a
human user. The maximum allowed energy limit ofE
max
=
0:075J and power limit of P
cmax
= 0:15W were used
as safety criteria limits of this experiment and the initial
controller parameters were kept at k
c
= 3:5Nm=rad and
b = 0:17Nms=rad. Experimental results shown in Fig 10
indicate that the variable impedance controller was able
to increase its compliance and damping injection during
collisions as well as interactions when energy and power
safety limits were violated.
1213
Fig. 10. Experimental results - Desired positionx
d
, measured positionx,
position errorxe , total energy of impedance controlled systemEtot , power
ﬂow from the controller to the plantPc , stiffness of the systemkc , damping
ratio b and controller output torque c
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper a controller design approach that combines
impedance control, passivity based design and safety metrics
was proposed for domestic robots. By analysing the energy
content of a standard impedance controlled manipulator
and the power ﬂow between the plant and the controller,
a combined energy and power based safety metrics were
used for on-line adjustment of the controller parameters to
ensure safety. To avoid the loss of passivity due to the
instantaneous modulation of the controller parameters, an
energy tank based implementation was used. In addition to
the overall passivity achieved by the design, its ﬂexibility
also allows update of the safety limits depending on the task
or the operating environment. Simulation and experimental
results on a 1-DOF manipulator indicate that the controller
handles both energy and power safety limits by varying its
impedance. A trade-off between safety and performance was
observed in an experiment where an increase in compliance
resulted higher trajectory error. While the presence of friction
can negatively affect system performance, its dissipative
nature acts in favour of the safety requirement by decreasing
the power transferred to the moving plant even below the
controller limited threshold value.
Future work on this design approach will focus on safety
aware impedance control of multiple D.O.F robotic manip-
ulators. This multidimensional extension considers cartesian
space impedance controllers and should deal with additional
complexity due to issues such non-linearity of the plant
dynamics and presence of friction. It will also investigate
ways to include additional safety features such as collision
detection and reaction in this controller design scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Harper and G. Virk, “Towards the development of international
safety standards for human robot interaction,” International Journal
of Social Robotics, vol. 2, pp. 229–234, 2010.
[2] J. Heinzmann and A. Zelinsky, “Quantitative Safety Guarantees for
Physical Human-Robot Interaction,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 22, no. 7-8, pp. 479–504, 2003.
[3] A. Bicchi and G. Tonietti, “Fast and ”soft-arm” tactics [robot arm
design],” Robotics Automation Magazine, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 2, pp.
22–33, 2004.
[4] M. Laffranchi, N. Tsagarakis, and D. Caldwell, “Safe human robot
interaction via energy regulation control,” in Proceedings of the 2009
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems,
Oct 2009, pp. 35–41.
[5] A. Albu-Sch¨ affer, C. Ott, and G. Hirzinger, “A uniﬁed passivity-
based control framework for position, torque and impedance control of
ﬂexible joint robots,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 23–39, 2007.
[6] A. Zanchettin, B. Lacevic, and P. Rocco, “A novel passivity-based
control law for safe human-robot coexistence,” in Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on,
2012, pp. 2276–2281.
[7] R. Ortega, J. A. L. Perez, P. J. Nicklasson, and H. J. Sira-Ramirez,
Passivity-basedControlofEuler-LagrangeSystems:Mechanical,Elec-
trical and Electromechanical Applications, ser. Communications and
Control Engineering. Springer, 2010.
[8] N. Hogan, “Impedance control - An approach to manipulation. I -
Theory. II - Implementation. III - Applications,” ASME Transactions
Journal of Dynamic Systems and Measurement Control B, vol. 107,
pp. 1–24, Mar. 1985.
[9] S. Stramigioli, Modeling and IPC control of interactive mechanical
systems A coordinate-free approach, ser. Lecture Notes in Control
and Information Sciences. Springer, 2001.
[10] H. Kazerooni, T. Sheridan, and P. Houpt, “Robust compliant motion
for manipulators, part I: The fundamental concepts of compliant
motion,” Robotics and Automation, IEEE Journal of, vol. 2, no. 2,
pp. 83–92, 1986.
[11] T. S. Tadele, T. de Vries, and S. Stramigioli, “PID motion control
tuning rules in a damping injection framework,” in American Control
Conference (ACC), 2013, 2013, pp. 4957–4962.
[12] J. Versace, “A review of severity index,” in Proceedings of Stapp Car
Crash Conference, 1971, pp. 149–170.
[13] A. D. Santis, B. Siciliano, A. D. Luca, and A. Bicchi, “An atlas of
physical humanrobot interaction,” Mechanism and Machine Theory,
vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 253 – 270, 2008.
[14] M. V . Damme, P. Beyl, B. Vanderborght, R. V . Ham, I. Vanderniepen,
A. Matthys, P. Cherelle, and D. Lefeber, “The role of compliance in
robot safety,” in Seventh IARP Workshop on Technical Challenges for
Dependable Robots in Human Environments, 2010, pp. 65–71.
[15] S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schffer, and G. Hirzinger, “Requirements for
safe robots: Measurements, analysis and new insights,” The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 11-12, pp. 1507–
1527, 2009.
[16] J. A. Newman, N. Shewchenko, and E. Welbourne, “A proposed new
biomechanical head injury assessment function – the maximum power
index,” in Stapp Car Crash Conference Forty-fourth Proceedings,
2000, pp. 215–247.
[17] F. DiLorenzo, Power and Bodily Injury. Society of Automotive
Engineers, 1976.
[18] J.-J. Park and J.-B. Song, “Collision analysis and evaluation of
collision safety for service robots working in human environments,” in
International Conference on Advanced Robotics, ICAR 2009., 2009,
pp. 1–6.
[19] K. Ikuta, H. Ishii, and M. Nokata, “Safety evaluation method of
design and control for human-care robots,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 281–297, 2003.
[20] J. L. Wood, “Dynamic response of human cranial bone,” Journal of
Biomechanics, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1 – 12, 1971.
[21] N. Yoganandan, F. Pintar, D. Maiman, J. Cusick, A. S. Jr, and
P. Walsh, “Human head-neck biomechanics under axial tension,”
Medical Engineering & Physics, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 289 – 294, 1996.
[22] R. Ortega, A. Van Der Schaft, I. Mareels, and B. Maschke, “Putting
energy back in control,” Control Systems, IEEE, vol. 21, no. 2, pp.
18–33, 2001.
1214
