Guiding Effects and Friction Modeling for Tendon Driven Systems
Jens Reinecke, Maxime Chalon, Werner Friedl and Markus Grebenstein
DLR - German Aerospace Center
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Email: jens.reinecke@dlr.de
Abstract?This paper discusses tendon friction effects re-
garding guiding and material selection. In order to extract
valuable information for designers of tendon driven systems,
several experiments are conducted to investigate e.g. the in-
trinsic friction or sliding effect. The results are used to build
anexperimentalfrictionmodelandtoderiveasetofguidelines.
The mechanical designer can use the proposed models to
anticipate the friction for a given tendon path. Additionally,
the guidelines help the mechanical designer to systematically
verify the numerous constraints involved in the design process
of a tendon driven system.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics of the DLR
has build an advanced anthropomorphic system [1]. In this
system, as well as other robot [2] the choice of a tendon
driven system has been made. Its main advantages are the
possibility of remote actuation, the small footprint and the
small inertia.
Nonetheless, as with any transmission system, the antici-
pation of the friction properties is paramount to achieve an
effective design. During the initial design phase, a prediction
of the friction effects helps the designer to decide e. g.
between a sliding surface or a pulley with bearing. Similarly,
the inuence of guiding conditions and their effect on the
lifetime of a tendon allows to select the proper material
combinations. Later on, the friction models can be used
to implement active friction compensation mechanisms and,
depending on the friction type, observers can be designed.
The experience gained in designing and operating the Awiwi
Hand
1
(Fig. 1a) and the DEXHAND (see Fig. 1b) proved that
the usual models are insufcient. For advanced systems, e. g.
the Awiwi Hand which is actuated using 38 tendons, more
complex effects must be accounted for in order to understand
the link between design choices and resulting friction.
Already in the late 80's, one of the rst tendon driven
robotic hands, the MIT/Utah hand [3], was using pulley
guiding and several publications considered the modeling
of the friction effects [4], [5], [6]. Most of the modeling
analyzed existing systems and did not provide comparisons
between several technical solutions. The focus was laid on
the sheath friction [7], [8], [9] or the pulley with bearing
friction [10] and did not consider other effects, such as
intrinsic friction or plastic deformation. In [8] friction and
viscoelastic effects of tendons sliding on curved pathways
1
The Awiwi Hand is the hand of the Hand Arm System. Awiwi comes
from the Hawaiian and means very fast.
are identied and modeled precisely. A control strategy to
compensate the nonlinear effects such as the hysteresis is
proposed and experimentally demonstrated. The availability
(a) DLR Hand Arm System (b) DEXHAND
Fig. 1: Examples of tendon driven hands at DLR
of many synthetic bers as well as development of machining
techniques offers many new options e. g. ceramic guiding.
Only little work has been published on comparing material
combinations [7] and guiding types. For the Awiwi hand,
the Dyneema
R  2
tendon was initially selected because of its
superior durability and the possibility to splice it [11]. Steel
tendons were discarded because they require large bending
radii and are difcult to terminate on site [12]. Similarly,
other bers, such as Vectran, could not handle the small radii
without a drastic reduction of their lifetime.
In this paper, multiple experiments are conducted to com-
pare tendon materials, tendon paths, pulley shapes or load de-
pendencies. As contribution the experimental results are used
to formulate guidelines, helping the mechanical designers to
select a technical solution. Additionally, a general model for
tendon driven systems is computed, that helps to anticipate
the friction behavior.
In the rst section of the paper, the experimental setups
are described and the results are reported. Each experiment
focuses on key aspect, e. g. the load dependency. The second
section discusses the results and proposes a general friction
model. The third section formulates guidelines for the design
of tendon driven systems.
2
Dyneema
R 
is a commercial name for a Ultra-high-molecular-weight
polyethylene bers
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6726
TABLE I: Hypothesis and Experiments
Experiment Short Description Detailed Description
I The friction increases with the load Sec. II-A
II Friction due to the angle between the bending planes (at least 2 pulley) Sec. II-B
III Sliding friction with different material combinations Sec. II-C
IV Intrinsic friction of different material combinations Sec. II-D
V Pulley diameter dependent friction Sec. II-E
VI The friction dependent on the outgoing angle of a tendon from the pulley Sec. II-F
VII Inuence of the pulley shape on the friction Sec. II-G
pulleys
tendon
weight
force sensor
0-200N
traverse
tension testing machine
Fig. 2: Test setup for experiment I,III-V ,VII
II. EXPERIMENTS DESCRIPTION AND RESULTS
This section describes the experiments used to verify
hypothesis concerning the friction dependency of the ten-
dons. All experiments were conducted on a Zwick tension
testing machine (SN BZ1-MM14450.ZW01, [13]). A dedi-
cated force sensor (200 N maximum, Zwick Xforce K, [14])
was used for the force measurement. The displacement was
measured by the integrated incremental encoder of the testing
machine. The setup is shown in Fig. 2. The view shows the
pulling head of the tension testing machine, the tendon, the
calibrated mass and the testbed. The testbed consists in a
plate with several slots. Pulleys with bearings or xed pulleys
of different material, used for sliding experiments, can be
placed on the slots in different congurations. Calibrated
weights are used to impose a known loading condition. The
testing machine pulls a tendon through the guiding with a
load attached and the force as well as the head displacement
are recorded. The conducted experiments are summarized in
Table I.
A. Load
Motivation: The ranges of forces applied on each tendon
varies for each nger in a robotic tendon driven hand. The
Weight [N]
Friction [N]
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Dyneema
R 
Steel
Fig. 3: Friction depending on the load. Green solid line:
Dyneema
R 
; Red dashed: steel; both materials are tested on
a PET joint material (ZX-100) of the Awiwi hand
maximum tendon force depends on the nger length, the
coupling matrix [15] and the ngertip force. It is usually
maximum for the thumb, since it has to oppose to the other
ngers. The tendon force depends on the joint torque as well
as the internal pretension. Indeed, in a nonlinear antagonistic
setup, the stiffness can be adjusted by modifying the internal
tendon forces. The choice of the stiffness should consider the
friction introduced by the internal forces.
Setup description: The setup uses two xed pulleys with
the same surrounding angle. On the end of the tendon several
calibrated weights are attached at the end of the tendon.
Dyneema
R 
and steel tendons are investigated. The difference
between the expected load and the measured force gives
the sliding friction depending on the load. The results are
reported in Fig. 3. The sliding material used for the xed
pulley is the material used for the joints of the Awiwi nger.
Discussion: Dyneema
R 
has less friction than steel on the
polymer guiding used in this experiment. The steel has a
linear behavior w. r. t. the load, whereas Dyneema
R 
has a
decreasing slope on higher loads. Below 20 N there is no
signicant difference between both materials, at higher load
Dyneema
R 
is superior. This experiment conrms that the
weight has an inuence. For the model only one  for the
working point of the DLR Hand Arm System is chosen.
6727
tendon
weight
force sensor
0-200N
traverse
pulleys with bearing
tension testing machine
Fig. 4: The test setup consisting of two test plates, the green
arrow shows the angle between the different bending planes
However, for the chosen material combination used in a
tendon driven system, specic measurements should be used
to create a model for the load dependency.
B. Angle between bending planes
Motivation: In the Awiwi hand a total of 38 tendons
must be guided from the forearm through the wrist to the
palm and then to the nger joints. The space available in
the palm is restricted because the hand is human sized,
implying that the tendons must be routed on several layers
by pulleys placed freely in 3D space. The various distances
between the pulleys imply that the tendon bending plane
must change. The weaving of the tendon is following a
spiral and consequently, the tendon torsion modies tendon
stiffness. The effect is called torsional friction in this paper.
Setup description: The torsional friction of
Dyneema
R 
and steel cables was experimentally measured
with the setup depicted in Fig. 4. Two slotted plates, similar
to the ones of the rst experiment, can be xed with an
adapter to realize several angles between the bending planes.
In this experiment the pulleys are placed on ball bearings.
Because ball bearings have very low friction, it is possible
to observe even small effects. It is expected that a high
torsion angle results in higher friction, therefore the pulleys
are placed as close as possible onto another.
Discussion: The forces reported in Fig. 5 prove that there
is no discernible inuence of the torsional friction. The
force measured with or without torsion is not signicantly
different for the steel or the Dyneema
R 
tendon. However,
the metal tendon exhibits much lower friction compared to
Angle between guiding plane in (

)
Friction [%]
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Dyneema
R 
Steel
Fig. 5: Friction depended on the torsional angle  ; Dark
green line: Dyneema
R 
on Aluminum alloy, Red dotted:
Dyneema
R 
Dyneema
R 
. The experiment in Sec. II-D will analyse this
rarely modeled effect.
C. Sliding
Motivation: The use of a pulley with ball bearing for
small bending angles requires a large volume and has to be
replaced sometimes by a simple, and much more compact
sliding surface. To be able to choose wisely between the
two opportunities, the mechanical designer needs to have
a comparison between the friction of bearing guiding and
friction of sliding (Coulomb friction). Material science
predicts that the sliding friction coefcient  depends on
tendon as well as the surface materials. The number of
combinations between materials, loads and bending angles
is exponentially increasing, therefore, the test are performed
with a unique load and for only two angles. It is veried,
according to mechanical science, that the bending angle or
the load has no inuence on the ranking of the materials.
Setup description: The experiment is conducted using
a constant weight of 1.875 kg. The experimental procedure
is similar to the one of the load dependency experiment.
Two xed pulley parts made of different materials: PVC,
PET(ZX-100), aluminum-alloy, steel and ceramic are used in
combination with Dyneema
R 
, Dyneema
R 
2, Protec, Com-
bat, Vectran and steel
3
tendons.
Discussion: The results for two surrounding angles are
reported in Fig. 6. As expected, the bending angle does not
inuence the order. The friction of Dyneema
R 
tendons is
quite constant on every materials. The steel tendon has very
high friction value on aluminum because the aluminum is
soft and unlike the PVC, does not have a self lubricating
behavior. The Dyneema
R 
2 tendon has the lowest friction on
all materials. Vectran is one of the worst tendon, it is related
3
The tendons are designed by their commercial names.
6728

PVC PA Alu-alloy Steel Ceramic
0
0.1
0.2

PVC PA Alu-alloy Steel Ceramic
0
0.1
0.2
Dyneema
R 
Dyneema
R 
2
Vectran
Steel
Protec
Combat
100

Surrounding angle
20

Surrounding angle
Fig. 6: Sliding experiments for a bending angle of 20

and
100

: friction coefcient for different material combinations.
On the x-axis are different sliding materials.
to its weaving type and its surface property. Steel tendons,
combined with steel pulleys or joint material pulleys, exhibits
a performance comparable to most of the polymer bers.
D. Intrinsic friction
Motivation: The intrinsic friction that is related to
the ber material, as well as the tendon coating, is
often neglected. It is rarely considered as an independent
contribution to the friction. However, the torsion experiment
highlighted its contribution to the overall friction. In a
complex routing using polymer tendons, such as the one of
the Awiwi hand, the intrinsic friction is the most signicant
part of the overall friction.
Setup description: The setup for this experiment is
similar to the sliding setup. The main difference is that
bearings are used, which allows to identify the intrinsic
friction, since the ball bearing friction is known from the
manufacturer. The friction is measured by varying the
bending angle across a range from 10

to 170

.
Discussion: The graphs in Fig. 7 conrm the effect, which
was visible in the torsional friction experiment. Steel has a
lower intrinsic friction than the two Dyneema
R 
types. As
expected the uncoated Dyneema
R 
has a lower intrinsic fric-
tion. In a long term testing, not reported herein, it is veried
that, as the wax is degrading, the performance of the coated
tendon approaches the one of the uncoated tendon. For each
experiment a new tendon was used for each measurement
point. If low friction is the objective steel tendons should be
used, knowing that the lifetime is shorter and the maximum
load is lower than with polymer tendons. An extra care
should be given to design the mechanism, since steel tendons
are more difcult to terminate. A comparable lifetime is
achievable by using larger pulley diameters [12]. The shape
of the curve is comparable to the ball bearing model proposed
in [16], [17]. The amount of friction obtained with steel
tendons is in accordance with ball bearing specications
Surrounding angle [

]
Frictioncoefcient
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
6p5 Dyneema
R 
6p5 Dyneema
R 
2
6p5 Steel
Fig. 7: Comparison of steel and Dyneema
R 
tendons on
friction generated at known surrounding angles
[18], therefore it can be concluded, that steel tendons have
negligible intrinsic friction.
E. Pulley Diameter
Motivation: The lifetime experiment in [12] showed,
that the pulley diameter is a critical parameter. Therefore
the inuence of diameter is also tested concerning the
intrinsic friction of the tendon. The results propose another
parameter the designer can take into account. Obviously, a
larger pulley diameter needs more space, but at the same
time it could offer longer lifetime or reduced friction.
Setup description: The setup is similar as the one in
the intrinsic friction Sec. II-D. Instead of several materials
the pulley diameter is changed. Dyneema
R 
has the highest
intrinsic friction. In this experiment only Dyneema
R 
was
used, because the highest difference in the measurements of
the friction are expected. For the diameter several pulleys
(6.5-9.5 mm) were manufactured and placed on the same
ball bearings. The diameters are chosen to start from the
smallest size used in the tendon driven system available.
The diameter is describing the core diameter of the tendon.
Discussion: Figure 8 depicts the dependency of the fric-
tion w. r. t. the bending angle. An obvious trend is observable,
wherein an increase of friction on the tendon is related to
a larger bending angle. A larger pulley generates a smaller
intrinsic friction in comparison to a smaller pulley for an
identical wrapping angle. This is because the bending of the
tendon on larger pulleys is not as severe as that on smaller
pulleys. This is due to the fact that the relative displacement
of a core ber w. r. t. a sink ber is smaller if the pulley
radius is larger.
F. Outgoing angle
Motivation: The palm routing requires the tendon to
change directions several times. However, the space in an
anthropomorphic sized tendon driven robot is limited (cf.
Sec. II-B). Therefore, the designer has to decide to introduce
6729
Surrounding angle [

]
Frictioncoefcient
20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
0
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
6.5 mm
7.5 mm
8.5 mm
9.5 mm
Fig. 8: Comparison of friction of Dyneema
R 
on different
pulley radius size from 6.5 mm to 9.5 mm
tendon
weight
force sensor
0-200N
traverse
pulleys with bearing
tension testing machine
Fig. 9: Test setup of the outgoing measurement with the
outgoing angle 
more pulleys or allow tendons to leave the pulleys out of
their plane. Because each pulley needs a turning axes, it is
expensive, in terms of space, to use numerous pulley planes.
Close tendon paths can be grouped and routed using pulleys
placed on the same turning axes, thus sparing important
space. This approach can induce higher friction due to the
sliding of the tendon on the pulley walls. Furthermore, a
too large angle leads the tendon to jump out of the pulley.
Several parameters such as the shape of the pulley or the
surrounding angle inuence the effects. The experiment
uses pulley shape depicted in Fig. 12a.
Setupdescription: To achieve the same surrounding angle
for each outgoing angle at least two pulleys have to be used.
Angle  in [

]
Frictioncoefcient
0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0.025
0.03
0.035
0.04
0.045
Abnormal operation
Steel data
Dyneema
R 
data
Fig. 10: Friction of steel and Dyneema
R 
tendons dependent
on the outgoing angle , Crosses: Data points
The rst one is guiding the tendon to a row of pulleys with
an adjusted angle, such that the desired surrounding angle
is achieved. The test consists in progressively increasing the
outgoing angle by displacing the second pulley. The friction
is again measured and it is also shown if the tendon jumps
of the pulley. The pulleys have a diameter of 6.5 mm in that
experiment and two materials are tested.
Discussion: The measurement of the friction of the out-
going angle show, that the relative friction is nonlinearly
increasing with the outgoing angle. The experiment also gave
information of the maximum outgoing angle. After 12

the
tendon starts to jump of the bearing. This is also depending
on the surrounding angle of the pulley. A higher surrounding
angle is more stable against jumping of the tendon, because
the length of the tendon, that is in contact with the pulley, is
higher. As explained in the setup, a single surrounding angle
that is representing the angle when changing the routing layer
in the palm, is tested. Note that another surrounding angle
can also change the friction, induced by the contact between
tendon and pulley border walls.
G. Groove Shape
Motivation: The Dyneema
R 
tendons are made of several
polymer bers that are braid together. The tendon shape
attens if it is guided on a pulley. Consequently, it is expected
that the shape of groove of the pulley has an inuence on
the friction.
Setup description: For this experiment the test setup of
the diameter change experiment is used. Instead of different
pulley sizes the groove shape is varied. Figure 12 depicts
the shapes used for the experiment. The weight is changed
during the measurement between 2 kg and 7 kg. The rst of
the tested groove shapes in Fig. 12a is shaped according to
the recommendation of the manufacturer of a steel tendons.
The second shape, Fig. 12b, is a simple rectangular shape
with round corners. The idea is to provide space for the
tendon bers to deform.
Discussion: Dyneema
R 
has in both load cases slightly
6730
Friction [N]
19 N weight
Dyneema
R 
Steel
0
1
2
3
4
5
Standard
Rectangle
Friction [N]
70 N weight
Dyneema
R 
Steel
0
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 11: Groove shape friction measurement for 19 and 70 N,
two groove shapes, steel and Dyneema
R 
(a) Standard shape (b) Rectangle shape
Fig. 12: Pulley groove shapes
less friction than the standard pulley shape (cf. Fig. 12a).
It highlights the inuence of the groove shape. In contrast
to the Dyneema
R 
tendon, the steel tendon has less friction
on the standard pulley, which emphasizes the importance of
selecting the appropriate groove shape for a given tendon
material.
III. MODELING
A model of the tendon friction for one tendon guiding
path can be established from the experimental results. The
friction is separated, in ball bearing, intrinsic, sliding and
torsional bending friction. It is assumed that the relevant
parameters are the surrounding angle, the outgoing angle, the
torsion angle, loading force and the materials. It is important
to note that the models are derived from experimental data
and do not necessarily represent the underlying physical
phenomenon. They are best suited for tendon driven hands
or systems with very similar loading conditions. Therefore,
extra care should be taken when extrapolating the results.
f
t;fric
(;;;f
load
) =f
t;bear
+f
t;intr
(1)
+f
t;slid
+f
t;tors
+f
t;outAngle
;
(2)
TABLE II: Model parameters of steel and dyneema with a
working point of 20N and Aluminum alloy as sliding surface
(a) Steel
Parameter Value
a -0.3656
b -0.7807
c -0.05405
d 0.006247
f 0.1091
g -0.006247
 0.1
(b) Dyneema
Parameter Value
a -5.387
b -2.485
c 0.01212
d 0.0004002
f 0.3386
g 0.001116
 0.1
with  the surrounding angle. The force f
load
is selected
for the Awiwi working point around 20 N. The ball bearing
friction an the intrinsic friction can not be measured sepa-
rately in this experimental setup, thus the two components
are implicitly modeled together. The different contributions
add up and yield:
f
t;pulley
() =f
t;bear
+f
t;intr
=a()
b
+c: (3)
The sliding friction drastically depends on the load. A simple
model manages to capture the experimental data. The model
is given by:
f
t;slid
=f
load
(e

 1); (4)
where  is experimentally selected. The torsional friction
f
t;tors
is neglected in this model, because the experiment
demonstrated that it has no signicant inuence. The effect
can become important if an another type of weaving or a
different ber material is used. In the case of the Awiwi one
obtains:
f
t;tors
() 0: (5)
The friction component related to the outgoing angle  is
expressed by:
f
t;outAngle
() =de
f
+g: (6)
The friction is increasing until the tendon jumps out of the
pulley. Clearly, the model is only valid for angles below

max
.
IV. DESIGN GUIDELINES
Unlike previous publications, the models are not concen-
trating on a specic technical solution but aim at comparing
several approaches. The experiments and the models reported
in the previous sections allow to derive a set a design
guidelines. As often the guidelines can create contradictions
and the designer has to realize the trade-offs.
 Steel tendons have less intrinsic friction, but at the same
diameter of the tendon less maximum load force.
 The friction coefcients of certain material combina-
tions, especially for small sliding angle, can be better
than bearings.
 The intrinsic friction is reduced by using larger pulley
diameter and less surrounding angle.
6731
 Polymer tendons have the disadvantages of plastic de-
formation, which is critical if no link side sensors are
used.
 Steel tendons have shorter life time than polymer ten-
dons at equivalent pulley diameter.
 The torsional angle has negligible inuence on the
friction in the case of polymer and steel tendons.
 A harder sliding surface material lessens the friction in
almost any material combination.
 A wax coating improves the tendon lifetime but in-
creases the intrinsic friction.
 A polymer based tendon without wax coating is pre-
ferred, if the tendon path comprises mostly sliding
surfaces.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes an experimental modeling of several
friction effects that were encountered during the development
of the Awiwi hand. The guidelines are focusing on the
loading condition that are representative of many tendon
driven hands. The models provide aspects of tendon guiding
that should be considered by the mechanical designer. The
experimental data conrms the validity of the models. The
work highlights the importance of some design parameters
that are usually underestimated such as the groove shape or
outgoing angle. The guidelines can be used as a checklist by
the mechanical designer.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been funded in parts by the European
Commissions Seventh Framework Programme as part of the
project The Hand Embodied (grant no. 248587). The authors
are with the Robotics and Mechatronics Center (RMC),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Oberpfaffenhofen, 82234
Wessling, Germany
REFERENCES
[1] M. Grebenstein, M. Chalon, W. Friedl, S. Haddadin, T. Wimbšck,
G. Hirzinger, and R. Siegwart, ?The hand of the DLR hand arm sys-
tem: Designed for interaction,? The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 31, no. 13, pp. 1531?1555, 2012.
[2] A. Wedler, M. Chalon, and al., ?DLRs space qualiable multi-ngered
DEXHAND,? in ASTRA, 2011.
[3] S. Jacobsen, E. Iversen, D. Knutti, R. Johnson, and K. Biggers,
?Design of the Utah/MIT dextrous hand,? in Robotics and Automation.
Proceedings. 1986 IEEE International Conference on, vol. 3. IEEE,
1986, pp. 1520?1532.
[4] A. Nahvi, J. Hollerbach, Y . Xu, and I. Hunter, ?An investigation of
the transmission system of a tendon driven robot hand,? in Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems' 94.'Advanced Robotic Systems and the
Real World', IROS'94. Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ/GI International
Conference on, vol. 1, 1994, pp. 202?208.
[5] W. H. Rockenbeck, ?Static load estimation using the utah/mit dextrous
hand,? Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, De-
partment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, 1989.
[6] W. Townsend and J. Salisbury Jr, ?The effect of coulomb friction
and stiction on force control,? in Robotics and Automation. IEEE
International Conference on, vol. 4, 1987, pp. 883?889.
[7] G. Palli and C. Melchiorri, ?Model and control of tendon-sheath trans-
mission systems,? in Robotics and Automation, >IEEE International
Conference on, May,2006, pp. 988?993.
[8] G. Palli, G. Borghesan, and C. Melchiorri, ?Modeling, identication,
and control of tendon-based actuation systems,?Robotics,IEEETrans-
actions on, vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 277?290, 2012.
[9] M. Kaneko and N. Imamaura, ?Development of a tendon-driven nger
with single pulley-type TDT sensors,? Intelligent Robots and Systems,
IEEE International Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 752?757, 1991.
[10] S. Uchiyama, J. Coert, L. Berglund, P. Amadio, and K.-N. An,
?Method for the measurement of friction between tendon and pulley,?
Journal of Orthopaedic Research, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 83?89, 2005.
[11] M. Grebenstein, M. Chalon, G. Hirzinger, and R. Siegwart, ?Antago-
nistically driven nger design for the anthropomorphic DLR hand arm
system,? Humanoid Robots, IEEE International Conference on, vol. 1,
pp. 609?616, 2010.
[12] W. Friedl, J. Reinecke, M. Chalon, and G. Hirzinger, ?FAS A Flexible
Antagonistic Spring element for a high performance tendon driven
hand,? Intelligent Robots and Systems, IEEE International Conference
on, vol. 1, pp. 1366 ? 1372, 2011.
[13] ?Tensile testing maschine,? Zwick, March 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.zwick.de/leadmin/content/gebrauchtmarkt/pdf/028976.pdf
[14] ?Force sensor manual,? Zwick, March 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.zwick.de/de/produkte/xforce-kraftaufnehmer.html
[15] H. Kobayashi, K. Hyodo, and D. Ogane, ?On tendon-driven robotic
mechanisms with redundant tendons,?InternationalJournalofRobotic
Research, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 561?571, 1998.
[16] P. Dahl, ?A solid friction model,? The Aerospace Corporation, El
Segundo, CA, Tech. Rep., 1968.
[17] ??, ?Measurement of solid friction parameters of ball bearings,?
Tech. Rep., 1977.
[18] ?Basic ball bearing application report,? Rimpar, Tech. Rep.,
March 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.grw.de/uploads/media/
GRWGrundlagenKugellagerauslegung.pdf
6732
