Spectral Analysis for Long-Term Robotic Mapping
Tom´ aˇ s Krajn´ ık Jaime Pulido Fentanes Grzegorz Cielniak Christian Dondrup Tom Duckett
Abstract— This paper presents a new approach to mobile
robot mapping in long-term scenarios. So far, the environment
models used in mobile robotics have been tailored to capture
static scenes and dealt with the environment changes by means
of ‘memory decay’. While these models keep up with slowly
changing environments, their utilization in dynamic, real world
environments is difﬁcult.
The representation proposed in this paper models the envi-
ronment’s spatio-temporal dynamics by its frequency spectrum.
The spectral representation of the time domain allows to iden-
tify, analyse and remember regularly occurring environment
processes in a computationally efﬁcient way. Knowledge of the
periodicity of the different environment processes constitutes
the model predictive capabilities, which are especially useful
for long-term mobile robotics scenarios.
In the experiments presented, the proposed approach is
applied to data collected by a mobile robot patrolling an indoor
environment over a period of one week. Three scenarios are
investigated, including intruder detection and 4D mapping.
The results indicate that the proposed method allows to
represent arbitrary timescales with constant (and low) memory
requirements, achieving compression rates up to 10
6
. Moreover,
the representation allows for prediction of future environment
states with 90% precision.
Index Terms— long-term autonomy, mobile robotics, spatio-
temporal mapping
I. INTRODUCTION
Long-term robotic autonomy has not yet been achieved
due to many challenges, one of them being the fact that
robotic mapping is vulnerable to changes in the environment.
However, many future tasks performed by mobile robots
will be carried out in places where humans perform their
usual activities, causing the environment to change. Many of
these activities consist of daily routines that are performed
on a regular basis. This regularity can be exploited by
the robots to build more robust representations of their
surroundings. To address this issue, we propose to treat
the observed environment states as signals over which a
spectral analysis can be performed to identify regularities of
environmental variations occuring on timescales from days
to months. Knowledge of these regularities allows efﬁcient
representation of the world model’s temporal domain as well
as prediction of the environment properties at a speciﬁc time.
This ability would allow to improve many tasks that the
mobile robots have to perform. For example, a robot can
predict the appearance of a particular location at a certain
time in order to achieve more robust localization. Moreover,
higher-level path planning can use the approach to predict
which doors will be open or which areas will be difﬁcult to
navigate because they will be crowded at particular times.
Lincoln Centre for Autonomous Systems, University of Lincoln, UK
tkrajnik@lincoln.ac.uk
Mapping a static environment is a problem that has been
widely studied for a long time [1], however mapping dy-
namic environments is still an open problem. So far, mapping
dynamic environments has been done by removing moving
objects from the representation of the environment [2],
[3] or by tracking these objects and classifying them as
moving landmarks [4], [5], [6]. In general, separation-based
approaches can handle some problems of dynamic mapping,
but they assume that most of the environment is static, which
makes them unsuitable for scenarios where the environment
appearance varies signiﬁcantly. In [7] a new map type that
represents local maps at different time scales is presented,
where the best map for localisation is chosen by its con-
sistency with current readings, which provided improved
localisation over large time scales.
Adaptive approaches never assume the map to be complete
and perform continuous mapping, adding new features to
the map every time the robot observes its environment. In
these approaches, the key problem is managing map size [8],
[9], [10]. [11] presents a feature persistence system based on
temporal stability in sparse vision-based maps. Some authors
propose systems that learn a ﬁxed set of possible states for
the dynamic objects in the environment, e.g. corresponding to
open and closed doors [12], [13], but this approach is limited
in the real world, where the number of states is unpredictable
and this approach does not offer state prediction capabilities.
[14] proposes a new representation that models occupancy
grid maps in the wavelet space in order to optimize the
amount of information that has to be processed for path plan-
ning. [15] presents a representation which models transitions
of dynamic objects in the environment. Spectral analysis
has also been used for 2D [16] and 3D [17] registration.
Finally, [18] has shown state prediction can be useful on
long-term robotic tasks by proposing an implementation of
an appearance change prediction (ACP) method to improve
the performance of place recognition on a large-scale dataset
under extremely different conditions.
The representation proposed in this paper models the
environment’s spatio-temporal dynamics by its frequency
spectrum. We propose to model local states of an envi-
ronment by means of a probability function which is a
superposition of periodical functions. The model includes
recurrent environment changes, which improves the robot’s
knowledge of its surroundings and the events that take place
in them. We hope that this proposal becomes a useful tool
for modelling the environment and leads to developing new
representations of the environment that consider the spatio-
temporal dynamics that take place there.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3706
II. SPECTRAL REPRESENTATION FOR SPATIO-TEMPORAL
ENVIRONMENT MODELS
Most mapping approaches assume that the principal com-
ponents of a particular environment model can be in two
distinct states. For example, cells of an occupancy grid are
occupied or free, edges of a topological map are traversable
or not, doors are opened or closed, rooms are vacant or
occupied, landmarks are visible or occluded, etc. In a typical
situation, the state of each model component is uncertain,
because it is measured indirectly by means of sensors which
are affected by noise. A common way to represent the uncer-
tainty in the state estimate of thej
th
world model component
is by its associated probability p
j
. This allows to counter
the effect of noisy measurements by employing statistical
methods, such as Bayesian ﬁltering. While Bayesian ﬁltering
methods allow to keep up with a changing environment, the
mathematical foundations they are based on assume a static
world, i.e. the p
j
of the world components are assumed to
be constant. As a result, a change in the environment causes
the old state to be ‘forgotten’ over time.
Once we assume that p
j
is a function of time, we need
to outline a suitable representation for p
j
(t). Although one
could simply store the whole history of the environment
model, such an approach would quickly face memory limita-
tions. Typical static 3D models of of complex environments
contain millions of distinct components [19]. Storing the
entire model history is infeasible. Moreover, in the context
of robotic mapping, it is not clear how to utilize the past
estimates of the environment models, i.e. what is the relation
of the past models to the current state of the world.
In our approach we assume that the variations of the
environment are caused by a number of unknown processes,
which might be periodical. If we could identify the in-
ﬂuence and periodicity of these processes, we could then
calculate the probabilities p
j
(t) from the description of
these processes. To identify these periodical processes, we
propose to use a frequency transform, namely the Fourier
transform [20].
A. An introduction to the Fourier Transform
The Fourier Transform (FT) is a well-established math-
ematical tool widely used in the ﬁeld of statistical signal
processing. It transforms a function of timef(t), into a func-
tion of frequency F (!), i.e. F (!)=F(f(t)). The function
F (!) is commonly referred to as the frequency spectrum
of f(t). The Fourier transform is invertible, and therefore,
one can recover the function f(t) from its spectrum F (!),
i.e. f(t) =F
0
(F (!)). If one wants to analyze or alter the
periodic properties of a process characterized by a function
f(t), it is reasonable to calculate its spectrumF (!), perform
the analysis or alteration in the frequency domain, and then
transform the altered spectrum F
0
(!) back to the temporal
domain. Such a process is referred to as spectral analysis.
Typically, F (!) is a complex-valued function, whose
absolute values and arguments correspond to the amplitudes
and phase shifts of the frequency components!. Considering
that f(t) is a real periodical discrete function, the spectrum
F (!) can be represented by a ﬁnite set of complex numbers.
B. The proposed representation
Let us represent the environment as a set of independent
components, which can be in two distinct states. Without
loss of generality, we will explain our approach with an
occupancy grid. Let us assume that each grid cell state
s
j
= foccupied;freeg is not constant, but is a function
of time, i.e. s
j
(t). The uncertainty of the state s
j
(t) is
represented by its probability p
j
(t). Now, let us assume
that the occupancy of each grid cell is affected by a set
of unknown periodical processes, which can be identiﬁed by
the Fourier Transform. Since we assume the occupancy of
the individual cells to be independent, we can explain the use
of the Fourier transform on the state s(t) of a single cell.
1) The spectral model: The main idea behind the pro-
posed model is to measure the temporal sequence of states
s(t) and calculate their frequency spectrum by means of a
Fourier Transform asS(!) =F(s(t)). Then, we select the l
most prominent (i.e. of highest absolute value) coefﬁcientsS
i
of the spectrumS and store them along with their frequencies
!
i
in a setP. The coefﬁcients stored inP are then used to
recover the smoothed signal p(t) by means of the Inverse
Fourier Transform p(t) = &(F
0
(P (!))), where & denotes a
saturation function that ensures that p(t)2< 0; 1 >. One
can easily verify that P (s(t) = occupied) = p(t) 0 and
P (s(t) =occupied)+P (s(t) =free) =p(t)+1 p(t) = 1,
i.e. p(t) satisﬁes Kolmogorov’s axioms and therefore is a
probability. Thresholding the probability p(t) allows us to
calculate an estimate s
0
(t) of the original state s(t). In
order not to lose any information of the original signal, the
differences between s
0
(t) and s(t) are stored in an outlier
setO, which is -encoded, see Figure 1.
Thus, our model of the state consists of two ﬁnite sets
P andO. The setP consists of l triples abs(P
i
), arg(P
i
)
and !
i
, which describe the amplitudes, phase shifts and
frequencies of the model spectra. Each such triple might
be interpreted as the importance, time offset and periodicity
of one particular periodical process inﬂuencing the state
s(t). We will refer to the number of modeled processes l
(i.e. to the number of triples inP) as the ‘order’ of the
spectral model. The setO represents a set ofk time intervals,
during which the state s(t) did not match the state s
0
(t)
calculated from p(t). Internally, the setO is implemented
as a sequence of values, indicating the starts and ends of
time intervals when the predicted and observed state did not
match, i.e. s
0
(t)6= s(t). Each interval is represented by its
limits <t
2k
;t
2k+1
).
2) Model adaptation: To be able to build, maintain and
use this representation, we deﬁne four operations: reconstruc-
tion of the original states(t), addition of a new measurement,
model update and prediction of the future state with a given
conﬁdence level. The aforementioned representation allows
us to retrieve the cell state s(t) by means of the following
equation:
s(t) = (F
0
(P)> 0:5) (t = 2O); (1)
3707
where is a XOR operation. The idea behind this equation
is to reconstruct the probability p(t) from the spectrumP,
set s(t) to 1 if p(t) exceeds 0.5 and ﬁnally to negate s(t) if
t belongs to the set of outliersO.
Whenever a real states
m
(t) is measured, we calculates(t)
by means of Equation (1) and if it differs from s
m
(t), the
current time t is added to the setO:
s
m
(t)6= ((F
0
(P)> 0:5) (t = 2O))!O =O[t: (2)
Since p(t) does not predict s(t) with perfect accuracy, the
setO is likely to grow larger as measurements are added.
To update the model, we reconstruct s(t) in the desired
time interval < t
start
;t
end
> and calculate its spectrum
P. Again, we select the l coefﬁcients with highest absolute
valuesjP
i
j and reconstruct the outlier setO by means of
Equation 2. In a typical situation, the updated spectrum
P would reﬂect s(t) more accurately, causing reduction of
the set O. Note, that the spectral model order l can be
changed prior to the update step without causing any loss
of information.
3) Prediction: Note, that the Equation (1) allows for
calculating s(t) for any t and that the threshold value of 0:5
can be set arbitrarily. In fact, a thresholdc such thatP (s(t) =
occupied)>c represents a conﬁdence level of the grid cell
being full at time t. Therefore, we can use Equation (1) for
future prediction of s(t) with a certain conﬁdence level c. In
the case of prediction, the outlier setO is not included in
the calculation and the predicted state might not match the
real state, so we denote it as s
0
(t;c). To simplify notation,
we also deﬁnes
0
(t) ass
0
(t; 0:5). Therefore,s
0
(t;c) ands
0
(t)
can be calculated as follows:
s
0
(t;c) =F
0
(P )>c: (3)
Measured state ? s(t)
Probability function ? p(t)
Estimated state ? s’(t)
Outlier set ? O
Discarded coeficients
Model coefficients
 0 2 4 6 8 10
Time [s]
Time domain
?2 ?1.5 ?1 ?0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2
Frequency [Hz]
Frequency domain
Parameters of the learned model
abs(P): { 196,   46,   23 }
arg(P): {  0,  1.57, 1.57 }
Frequencies: { 0, 0.2, 0.6 }
Outlier set O: { 3.7, 3.8 }
Fig. 1. An example of the measured state and its spectral model. The left
part shows the time series of the measured state s(t), probability estimate
p(t), predicted state s
0
(t) and outlier setO. The upper right part shows the
absolute values of the frequency spectrum of s(t) and indicates the spectral
coefﬁcients, which are included in the model.
An example of the third-order spectral model which repre-
sents a quasi-periodic function is provided in Figure 1. Since
the observed processes are not identiﬁed perfectly, one can
expect that the prediction becomes less and less accurate
over time. However, modelling the uncertainty of the model
prediction is outside the scope of this paper.
C. Notes on notation
Throughout the rest of the article, we will keep the nota-
tion introduced in Section II-B. Therefore, s
j
(t) represents
the measured state of the j
th
world component, P
i;j
(!
i
) is
a complex number representing amplitude and phase shift
of the state’s frequency component !
i
, (i.e. i
th
coefﬁcient
ofP), the value of p
j
(t) is the state’s probability estimate
given by the inverse Fourier transform ofP,s
0
j
(t) is the most
probable state at a given time t and s
0
j
(t;c) is the estimate
of s
j
(t) = 1 with a conﬁdence level c. For the sake of
simplicity, the index j will be omitted in the case where our
description concerns a single world model component only.
D. Spectrum and periodical processes
In the rest of the article, we will try to examine the
tractability of using the Fourier transform as a core com-
ponent of spatio-temporal models for mobile robotics. In
particular, we will investigate the following questions:
 How many parameters of the spectrum typically have
to be stored to represent and predict the environment
state?
 What is the accuracy and efﬁciency of the spectral
representation?
 Are the predictions of this approach good enough to
detect anomalous situations?
 How does the approach deal with sensor noise and
localization uncertainty?
To answer these questions, we analysed several types of
environment models gathered by a mobile robot, which was
continuously operating for more than one week in an indoor
environment shared with humans.
III. DATA COLLECTION
Our experimental platform consists of a SCITOS-G5 mo-
bile robot (see Figure 2) equipped with RGB-D and laser
sensors. The robot gathered two datasets in two different
environments: a staff ofﬁce and the robotics lab of the
Lincoln Centre for Autonomous Systems.
A. The ofﬁce dataset
The ﬁrst dataset, considered for basic evaluation, was
gathered from a stationary position with sensors aimed at the
door of one of the building’s ofﬁces. The range measurement
was used to establish the occupancy of a single cubic cell
located in the middle of the room entrance. Since the ofﬁce
has an open door policy, the door remained open whenever
the ofﬁce was occupied by a person. Therefore, the measured
state s(t) not only indicated if the particular area of the
environment was occupied or free, but also corresponded to
the presence of people inside the ofﬁce. Every time someone
went through the door, the monitored area was brieﬂy occu-
pied and the room was considered empty, which introduced
noise on the measured state s(t). The measurements were
taken continuously for one week (July 23-29 2013) at a rate
3708
of 30Hz, so s(t) consisted of 18 million values. After this
week, two additional full-day datasets (July 31 and August
2 2013) were gathered.
B. The laboratory datasets
To gather the second dataset the robot was programmed
to visit three designated areas of the robotics lab every ﬁve
minutes. Each time an area was visited, the robot created
a 2D and 3D point cloud and analysed the onboard color
camera image to check for the presence of people. Thus,
the robot created three datasets of different dimensionality,
where each dataset contains observations from three different
places, see Figure 2. We will refer to these datasets as Lab-
2D, Lab-3D and Lab-1D respectively.
Fig. 2. The robot and its view of two locations of the ‘Lab’ dataset.
The data gathering process started on August 2013 and is
still in progress. For this study, we use the data collected dur-
ing the ﬁrst week of September consisting of approximately
12,000 point clouds and 6,000 results of people detection.
The autonomous patrolling has been based on combination
of the ROS nav stack and the visual localization method
proposed in [21]. The robot reports its status regularly [22],
so the occational failures can be dealt with immediatelly.
IV. ALGORITHM PERFORMANCE
To answer the questions set in Section II-D, we analyse the
performance of the proposed representation on the datasets
described in Section III.
A. Model accuracy and efﬁciency
Knowing the coefﬁcientsP
i
(!
i
) of the spectrumP allows
us to calculate an estimate s
0
(t) of the original state s(t).
A natural concern is the accuracy of reconstruction of s
0
(t),
which affects the prediction capabilities of the model and the
size of the outlier setO. One can expect that increasing the
number of spectral parameters will increase the reconstruc-
tion accuracy. However, as the number of parameters grows,
the model becomes more adjusted to the speciﬁc time series
ofs(t) and loses its generality. This loss of generality would
hamper the ability of the model to predict the environment
state in the future.
We deﬁne the accuracy of the spectral model q(t
a
;t
b
) as
the ratio of the correctly estimated signal s
0
(t) on a given
time interval t2ht
0
;t
1
i to the length of the interval:
q(t
a
;t
b
) =
1
t
b
 t
a
t
b
Z
ta
js
0
(t) s(t)jdt: (4)
In our case, q =q(0;T ) can be directly calculated from the
values t
i
stored in the outlier setO by
q =
1
T
jOj=2 1
X
k=0
(t
2k+1
 t
2k
): (5)
Suppose that the spectrumP is estimated for s(t) within
intervalht
c
;t
d
i and q is calculated for an intervalht
a
;t
b
i.
If t
c
 t
a
, then q(t
a
;t
b
) relates to the accuracy of model
prediction and ifht
a
;t
b
i 2 ht
c
;t
d
i, then q relates to the
accuracy of reconstruction.
To estimate the dependence of the accuracy of reconstruc-
tionq
r
and predictionq
p
on the number of model parameters,
we built a spectral model of the one-week-long ‘Ofﬁce’
dataset. The accuracy of reconstruction q
r
was calculated as
the difference between the original and reconstructed signal.
Moreover, we calculated the accuracies of predictionq
p1
and
q
p2
for two days of the following week, see Figure 3. The
Measurements used to establish the model
Predicted probability estimate
Predicted future state
Measured state ? dataset 1
Measured state ? dataset 2
Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat Sun Mon
Fig. 3. Comparison of predicted and real values - ofﬁce dataset.
dependence of the reconstruction and prediction accuracy on
the number of parameters of the spectral model is shown in
Figure 4. The Figure shows that the spectral model order
Fig. 4. Model accuracy vs. model complexity - ofﬁce dataset.
of 15 parameters achieves 95% reconstruction accuracy. As
expected, the reconstruction accuracy q
r
increases monoton-
ically with the number of spectral model coefﬁcients j, but
the prediction quality does not. The local maxima of q
p1
3709
and q
p2
at l = 2 and l = 3 suggest that for the purpose of
prediction, one should use a spectral model of order 3.
The test indicates that the spectral model allows to rep-
resent millions of measurements with only a few complex
numbers. Thus, the spectral representation P without the
outlier setO achieves compression ratios in the order of
millions while losing less than 5% of information. The full
model is composed of 15 triples of spectrumP and 160
values in the setO that represent 80 time intervals where
the spectral model did not match the measured sequence.
Thus, the proposed model achieves lossless compression of
the temporal data with a compression ratio reaching 10
5
.
Since the model that achieved the most accurate signal
reconstruction included 15 spectral components, we used
this model order for the Lab-nD datasets as well. The
reconstruction quality of the ‘Ofﬁce’ dataset was 0:95 and
the corresponding values for the ‘Lab’ datasets are shown in
Table I.
TABLE I
RECONSTRUCTION QUALITY FOR DIFFERENT DATASETS
Dataset Lab-1D Lab-2D Lab-3D
Location 1 0.95 0.99 0.99
Location 2 0.99 0.97 1.00
Location 3 0.96 0.98 0.99
The data indicate that the model size remains more or
less constant regardless of the time span it covers. Therefore,
higher compression rates are achieved simply by representing
larger datasets. On average, the proposed model represented
the environment state with 98% accuracy while stationary
models achieved 95% accuracy.
B. Anomaly detection
An anomalous situation can be deﬁned as a local state of
the world which deviates from the internal world model of
the robot. Since our model can predict the state s(t) with a
given conﬁdence value by Equation 3, we can assume that a
measurement s
m
(t) is anomalous with conﬁdence level c if
s
m
(t)6= (F
0
(P )>c): (6)
While setting c too high would lower the algorithm’s sen-
sitivity to anomalies, a low value of c would result in an
increased number of false positives. An optimal conﬁdence
level c can be calculated from the statistical properties of
p(t) and the requirements for the number of false positives
and failed detections.
Figure 5 shows the results of anomaly detection for the
Lab-1D dataset. The anomaly detection was performed “post-
hoc”, i.e. we ﬁrst build the model from the entire dataset and
then applied Equation 6. The conﬁdence level c was set to
90% and the anomalous situations correspond to the room
being accessed at night or a sudden absence of all people
just before and after a meeting, see Figures 6 and 2.
These examples demonstrate how the model adapts its
inner dynamics to represent the observed environment. The
Sun Mon Tue Wed Thu Fri Sat
Person detected
Probability of person present
Anomaly detection
displayed in Figure 8
Anomalous situations
Fig. 5. Anomaly detection for two locations of the Lab-1D dataset.
Fig. 6. Anomalous situations in the ‘Lab’ environment. Left: Workplace
empty on Friday early afternoon. Right: Person entering the room at night.
differences between the inner dynamics and real observations
allow for natural detection of anomalous situations with
arbitrary conﬁdence levels. Figure 5 shows how the spectral
models for each laboratory location adapt to the particular
location’s dynamics. This results in a different anomaly
detector for each location. For example, the present of a
person on Monday morning is considered normal for location
1, but triggers the anomaly detector on locations 2 and 3.
C. Building spatiotemporal maps for mobile robotics
The quality of the aforementioned datasets was not sig-
niﬁcantly affected by the sensor position, because either
the sensor was static or the measurement did not require
perfect sensor localization. However, metric-map-building
algorithms require precise localization of the sensor. While
localization can be solved by means of known SLAM
methods, the position estimate is never absolutely error-
proof or perfectly accurate. Therefore, localization glitches
and inherent sensor noise cause degradation of metric maps
over time. This degradation can be countered by means
of Bayesian ﬁltering methods. Since our approach is not
explicitly designed to suppress sensor noise, one might
assume that it would not deal with the aforementioned issues.
However, from the theoretical point of view, taking into
account only the most prominent spectral components in the
update step (see section II-B) is equivalent to sensor data
ﬁltering. Thus, map errors caused by noisy measurements
should fade out similarly as with the classical mapping ap-
proaches. To emphasize new measurements, the update step
introduced in Section II-B might be performed for a limited
slice of the data gathered causing the model to “forget”
3710
observations that were made too long time ago. However,
such a forgetting scheme is beyond the scope of this paper. To
Fig. 7. Reconstructed and real environment state at different times.
demonstrate that our representation can deal with the noisy
measurements of the environment states s
j
(t), we used the
3D and 2D measurements to build 3D and 2D occupancy
grids, see Section III. To suppress the effects of imprecise
localization, the point clouds gathered by the range sensors
were aligned by means of the ICP algorithm prior to the
occupancy grid calculation. The individual grid maps were
aligned over each other. Therefore we were able to track how
the occupancy of the individual grid cells changes over time.
Since the cells are considered independent, each cell of the
aforementioned grids maintains its own spectral model built
from approximatelly 2000 measurements gathered regularly
during one week. Figure 7 provides a detail of the 3D
occupancy grid at location 2 of the ‘Lab’ dataset, showing
the estimated probabilities and measured states of individual
cells at different times.
The accuracy of reconstruction of each cell’s spectral
model was calculated, see Table I. The results indicate that
the accuracy and compression ratio of the spectral model was
not signiﬁcantly affected by the imperfections of the robot
localization.
V. CONCLUSION
A novel approach for spatiotemporal mapping in the
context of mobile robotics has been presented. The approach
is based on an assumption that in a mid-term perspective,
the environment is inﬂuenced by several processes which
might be periodical and that the evolution of the environment
can be described by the periodicity, amplitude and time shift
of these underlying processes. To identify the parameters of
these processes and to predict the environment’s local state
we use the direct, respectively inverse Fourier transform. The
core of the proposed temporal representation is composed of
the most prominent frequency components of the Fourier
spectrum – these relate to the most important periodical
processes inﬂuencing the environment.
To evaluate the perfomance of the proposed method in a
real scenario, we have applied it to data gathered by a mobile
robot continuously patrolling in an indoor environment for a
period of one week while detecting people and building 2-
and 3-D occupancy grids of designated locations.
The results indicate that the proposed method allows
to represent arbitrary timescales with constant (and low)
memory requirements, achieving compression rates up to
10
6
. Moreover, we demonstrate that the representation allows
prediction of future states of the environment with accuracies
ranging from 88% to 99%, which enables easy detection of
unexpected (anomalous) environment states.
In the future, we will study the utility of the spectral model
for mobile robot localization, path planning, information-
driven spatio-temporal exploration and semantic segmenta-
tion. We will examine the method’s accuracy in long-term
scenarios and extend the spectral representation by modelling
the uncertainty of its long-term predictions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work has been supported by the EU ICT project
600623 ‘STRANDS’. We thank Miroslav Kulich and Pablo
Urcola for valuable remarks regarding probability theory.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Thrun, “Robotic mapping: A survey,” Exploring artiﬁcial intelli-
gence in the new millennium, pp. 1–35, 2002.
[2] D. H¨ ahnel, D. Schulz, and W. Burgard, “Mobile robot mapping in
populated environments,” Advanced Robotics, 2003.
[3] D. Wolf and G. Sukhatme, “Mobile robot simultaneous localization
and mapping in dynamic environments,” Autonomous Robots, 2005.
[4] L. Montesano et al., “Modeling dynamic scenarios for local sensor-
based motion planning,” Autonomous Robots, 2008.
[5] C. Wang et al., “Simultaneous localization, mapping and moving
object tracking,” International Journal of Robotics Research, 2007.
[6] D. Migliore et al., “Use a single camera for simultaneous localization
and mapping with mobile object tracking in dynamic environments,”
in ICRA Workshop on Safe navigation in dynamic environments, 2009.
[7] P. Biber and T. Duckett, “Experimental analysis of sample-based maps
for long-term slam,” International Journal of Robotics Research, 2009.
[8] M. Milford and G. Wyeth, “Persistent navigation and mapping using
a biologically inspired SLAM system,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 9, pp. 1131–1153, 2010.
[9] K. Konolige and J. Bowman, “Towards lifelong visual maps,” in
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2009.
[10] S. Hochdorfer and C. Schlegel, “Towards a robust visual SLAM
approach,” in International Conference on Advanced Robotics, 2009.
[11] F. Dayoub, G. Cielniak, and T. Duckett, “Long-term experiments with
an adaptive spherical view representation for navigation in changing
environments,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 2011.
[12] C. Stachniss and W. Burgard, “Mobile robot mapping and localization
in non-static environments,” in Conf. on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2005.
[13] N. Mitsou and C. Tzafestas, “Temporal occupancy grid for mobile
robot dynamic environment mapping,” in Mediterranean Conference
on Control Automation, 2007.
[14] M. Yguel et al., “Wavelet occupancy grids: a method for compact map
building,” in Field and Service Robotics, 2006.
[15] T. Kucner et al., “Conditional transition maps: Learning motion
patterns in dynamic environments,” in Int. Robots and Systems, 2013.
[16] M. Pﬁngsthorn et al., “Maximum likelihood mapping with spectral
image registration,” in Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2010.
[17] A. Makadia et al., “Fully automatic registration of 3d point clouds,”
in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2006.
[18] P. Neubert et al., “Appearance change prediction for long-term navi-
gation across seasons,” in European Conf. on Mobile Robotics, 2013.
[19] U. Frese and L. Schroder, “Closing a million-landmarks loop,” in
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2006.
[20] R. N. Bracewell and R. Bracewell, The Fourier transform and its
applications. McGraw-Hill New York, 1986, vol. 31999.
[21] T. Krajn´ ık and M. Nitsche, “Visual Localization System for Mobile
Robotics,” in International Conference on Advanced Robotics, 2013.
[22] “Linda’s status.” [Online]. Available: http://twitter.com/LindaStrands
3711
