Functional Task based Assistance during Walking
for a Lower Extremity Assistive Device
Bingquan Shen, Jinfu Li, Student Member, IEEE, and Chee-Meng Chew, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this paper, we propose a functional task based
assistance controller to aid user in the walking task with our
Lower Extremity Assistive Device (LEAD). Firstly, a gait period
detector, which utilizes a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM), is
developed to estimate the user’s current gait period among the
six major periods. Then, an impedance based controller is used
to apply assistive torques to the hip and knee joints of the user
based on the functional task intended at the current gait period.
To validate the above control scheme, preliminary experiments
have been performed with one healthy subject walking on a
treadmill. The results show that the gait period detector can
effectively detect each gait period for the whole cycle. Based on
measurementsoftheheartrate,theproposedassistancemethod
has shown that it can effectively assist a human user in walking
at speed of 1 km=h.
I. INTRODUCTION
Gait period detection method estimates the current motion
period based on sensors worn on the user, and aims to inject
an appropriate amount of force in the right direction to assist
the user in that particular period of motion. Wearable gait
period detection systems were developed initially as a less
expensive alternative to traditional optical based clinical gait
analysis systems [1]–[3]. These gait analysis systems can
quantitatively analyze the gait of patients which offers the
clinicians a tool for assessing gait pathologies as well as an
evaluation tool in rehabilitation applications.
Currently, there are many lower extremity exoskeletons [4]
and control strategies for assistance [5]. In this paper, we will
only review some devices exploiting gait period detection
method in order to provide timely assistance during the user’s
gait, for example the HAL and the MIT’s exoskeleton.
The HAL broadly classiﬁes walking into stance and swing
states based on Ground Reaction Force (GRF) sensors thresh-
old [6]. For the hip joint, constant predetermined ﬂexion and
extension assistive torques are activated based on the stance
and swing states of the opposite leg. This requires sensors
to be mounted on the unaffected leg, which unnecessarily
encumbers its motion. For the knee joint, no assistive torque
is provided during the swing state. However, users may
require assistive force particularly at certain periods of swing
where knee ﬂexion is required for over ground clearance.
For MIT’s exoskeleton [7], stance and swing state is sub-
divided into early and late phases. Maximum and minimum
turning points of joint angles are used as transitions criteria
Bingquan Shen, Jinfu Li and Chee-Meng Chew are with the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, National University of Singapore, 21 Lower
Kent Ridge Road, Singapore 119077. (E-mail: shenbingquan@nus.edu.sg)
Fig. 1. Lower Extremity Assistive Device (LEAD)
within each subdivided state, making this method susceptible
to noise. Moreover, the constant preset assistive torque used
at the hip does not correlate well with the joint torque proﬁle
of a human during level walking. Similarly, the subdivision
of the knee states was not exploited as only resistive force
is added throughout the stance state while the joint remains
free during all the subdivided swing states.
We can see that current gait period detection method that
provide assistance overly-simpliﬁes the classiﬁcation of gait
periods. From the authors’ knowledge, no research have tried
to provide functional assistance in subdivided gait period
while walking. Moreover, a single threshold for transition
may lead to robustness issues in the presence of noise. Thus,
in this paper, we propose a functional task based assistance
controller to aid user during walking, and evaluate it with
our Lower Extremity Assistive Device (LEAD), as shown in
Fig. 1. The details of the device can be found in [8].
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
introduce the gait period detector using Gaussian Mixture
Model and how to apply an assistive torque in each subdi-
vided period . Then in Section III, the experiment details
are given, and in Section IV, experimental results are shown
and discussed. The last section provides the conclusions and
future works.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 246
Gait Phases
Stance Phase Swing Phase
Early Stance
Mid Stance
Early Swing
Late Stance
Late Swing
Mid Swing
72% 0% 12% 50% 62% 85% 100%
% of Gait Cycle
Gait Periods
Early
Stance
Mid
Stance
Late
Stance
 Early
Swing
 Late
Swing
 Mid
Swing
Fig. 2. Normal walk cycle illustrating the gait periods and their starting
and ending percentage [9]
TABLE I
GAIT PERIODS AND FUNCTIONS
Gait Periods Functions
Early Stance Loading, weight transfer
Mid Stance Support of entire body weight, center of mass
moving forward
Late Stance Unloading and preparing for swing
Early Swing Foot clearance
Mid Swing Limb advances in front of body
Late Swing Limb deceleration, preparation for weight
transfer
II. GAIT PERIOD BASED ASSISTANCE CONTROLLER
It is widely accepted that a basic human gait cycle during
level walking could be generalized into a periodic sequence
of events as shown in Fig. 2 [9], [10]. Different stages of
the gait cycle, also known as gait periods, have different
functional requirements as summarized in Table I. Therefore,
we postulate that if the gait periods could be determined, the
intended action of the joints would be known. As a result, the
assistive device can provide required torque in the appropriate
direction to aid the user during walking. For stroke patients,
they could exhibit a more normal gait pattern with the help
of our proposed controller.
To achieve this objective, two requirements must be met.
Firstly, we must be able to detect the different periods and
their transitions in a gait cycle. Next, we have to modulate
the torque output to assist in the functional task of the user
during each gait period.
A. Gait Period Detector using Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM)
The gait period detector attempts to divide the gait cycle
into the six gait periods, namely, early stance, mid stance,
late stance, early swing, mid swing and late swing. Since the
gait cycle is repetitive, the gait periods of a healthy individual
will transit sequentially during walking. If the sensor data
are exactly the same during each gait cycle, a threshold
method based on GRF and joint angles can effectively serve
as transiting conditions between the states. However, the
variability between each gait cycle makes such methods not
as robust.
In a previous study, a Support Vector Machine (SVM)
based gait period classiﬁcation algorithm was developed [11].
The detection accuracy was high, but the high computational
cost made it difﬁcult to implement in realtime. Therefore
in this work, we use a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM)
[12] to characterize the probability of the user in each
gait period. The GMM classiﬁer considers both the mean
and covariance of the sensor data to model a multivariate
Gaussian distribution [13] in order to evaluate its probability
in each state. Moreover, its level of complexity could be
controlled based on the number of mixture components
deﬁned by the designer. For real-time applications, a small
number of mixture components could be used to achieve fast
computational speed.
A GMM is constructed for each gait period. From [12],
the probability of being in a gait period, for a given set of
D-dimensional sensor measurement x, is written as
p(xj) =
M
X
i=1
!
i
g(xj
i
;C
i
) (1)
where w
i
;i = 1; ;M, are the mixture weights for the
GMM, and g(xj
i
;C
i
), i = 1; ;M, are the component
Gaussian densities for the GMM. Each component density is
a D-variate Gaussian function of the form
g(xji;Ci) =
1
((2)
D=2
jCij
1=2
)
expf 
1
2
(x i)
0
C
 1
i
(x i)g
(2)
where
i
andC
i
are the mean vector and covariance matrix,
respectively. The mixture weights satisfy the constraint of

M
i=1
!
i
= 1.
Each GMM is parameterized by the mean vectors, co-
variance matrices and mixture weights from all component
densities, given as
 =f!
i
;
i
;C
i
g; i = 1;:::;M (3)
Given the training data and GMM conﬁguration, the Ex-
pectation Maximization (EM) [14] algorithm is used to ﬁnd
the Maximum Likelihood (ML) estimates of the parameters
of each GMM.
Once each GMM is parameterized, the current gait period
for a given input of sensor measurement x, is the gait
period with the highest probability during stance or swing
respectively.
B. Functional Assistive Torque
After the gait period is determined, an assistive torque
could be applied in a manner that helps the user achieve
the joint’s intended function in that speciﬁc gait period.
In this work, an impedance-based method [15] is used to
generate the assistive torque. The torque of each joint can
be modulated with an impedance property which consists of
a spring and damper characteristic with a ﬁxed equilibrium
position. A different set of impedance property will be used
at different periods of the gait cycle. This method differs from
247
TABLE II
DIRECTION OF ASSISTIVE TORQUE OF JOINTS FOR EACH GAIT PERIOD
No. Gait Periods
Direction of Assistive Torque at Joint
Hip Knee
1 Early Stance Extension Extension
2 Mid Stance Neutral Extension
3 Late Stance Flexion Neutral
4 Early Swing Flexion Flexion
5 Mid Swing Neutral Neutral
6 Late Swing Extension Extension
traditional rehabilitation robots which are mostly position
controlled. In position control, the joints are controlled to
track a predeﬁned trajectory for every step. The lack of
cycle to cycle variation in kinematics and sensorimotor
feedback limits motor learning [16]. Hence, over the years,
researchers have tried to make the system more compliant by
incorporating impedance control to their predeﬁned trajectory
in order to increase patient’s activity [17]–[19]. For these
compliant trajectory methods, assistive torque will be felt by
the user if he lags the predeﬁned trajectory of the equilibrium
point. However, resistive torque will be felt if the user moves
faster than the equilibrium point. Thus, those patients who are
capable of accomplishing some functional tasks on their own
will ﬁnd themselves hindered by the device. Therefore, the
approach used in this work aims to provide assistive torque to
assist in the intended function only in the intended direction
at each gait period. In this way, the impaired functional tasks
will be supported by the device, while freedom of motion will
be given to the patient for those unimpaired tasks.
Based on the gait analysis in [9], the direction of assistive
torque at each joint within each gait period can be deter-
mined, as shown in Table II.
The unidirectional impedance model of each joint is given
by
 =k( 
0
) b
_
 (4)
where the joint torque, is related to the input joint angular
position, and speed
_
, by the stiffness termk, damping term
b, and equilibrium angle
0
. If the direction of assistance is in
extension, the assistive joint torque is zero if the computed
is less than zero. And for joint in ﬂexion, the assistive torque
is zero if the computed  is greater than zero. The assistive
torque for joints in neutral mode is set to be zero.
As switching between the gait periods may result in abrupt
switching of assistive torque, a sigmoid function was added
during each transition to fade away the previous torque while
fading in the desired assistive torque at its current state.
The sigmoid function is described by
y =
1
1 +expf A(t T )g
(5)
where t is the time elapsed since transition, and A and T
are parameters to adjust the steepness and time shift of the
Fig. 3. Sigmoid function used to smooth the torque proﬁle
function, respectively. Fig. 3 shows the output of the sigmoid
function implemented, where parameters A and T are set to
be 50 and 0:1, respectively.
Hence the output torque with the sigmoid fading will be

output
= (1 y)
prev
+y
curr
(6)
where 
prev
is the assistive torque from the previous gait
period just before the transition and 
curr
is the assistive
torque in the current gait period.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Gait Period Detector using Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM)
To parameterize each GMM, training data have to be
collected. Therefore, the LEAD is worn by a able-bodied
subject who is then asked to walk on a treadmill at a speed
of 1 km=h with the LEAD. The walking speed is selected
to be comparable to the walking speed of stroke patients
[20]. The subject is a healthy 28-year-old male, 63 kg in
weight, 1:71 m in height. The joint angle of the LEAD is
ﬁrst initialized to be zero when that subject is in an upright
standing posture before each walking trial. Prior to the data
collection, the subject is given ﬁve minutes to walk on a
treadmill while wearing the LEAD in friction compensation
mode to get used to the assistive device.
Five sensor measurements are recorded and represented
by a 5 1 vector x. The ﬁrst two are the hip and knee
ﬂexion angles of the LEAD respectively. The remaining
three measurements are the GRF readings from the ﬁrst and
fourth metatarsal, and the calcaneus positions, which will
be referred to as front, mid and back GRF, respectively. All
readings are captured at a rate of 500 Hz.
A total of three walking trials are conducted with ﬁve
minutes of rest between the trials. For each trial, the treadmill
speed is set to 1km=h, and the data are recorded only when
the subject reaches a steady walking speed. Thirty seconds
of readings are recorded for each trial.
Before training, the measurements from each sensor are
normalized based on the respective maximum and minimum
values for all the walking trials. The time span of the data
248
is normalized in terms of percentage of gait cycle, which is
computed based on the time period across two consecutive
heel strike events.
The training label for each gait period is based on their
respective occurrence in terms of percentage gait cycle from a
normal Clinical Gait Analysis (CGA) data in Fig. 2 [9]. Once
parameterized, the GMM is implemented on the LEAD for
on-line classiﬁcations.
B. Functional Assistive Torque
The gait period detector is implemented on the LEAD,
before the functional assistive torque model is incorporated.
Before the start of the experiment, the subject is given two
minutes to walk on a treadmill at 1km=h while wearing the
LEAD to familiarize with the assistive device.
To tune the impedance parameters, the subject is asked
to walk on the treadmill at 1 km=h with the LEAD in
assistance mode. The equilibrium points are pre-set and the
stiffness and damping parameters are adjusted for each gait
period until the subject feels a comfortable assistance for
the entire gait cycle. Pre-set equilibrium points for the hip
are chosen based on the average maximum and minimum
hip trajectory during un-assisted walking and the intended
direction of assistance. Equilibrium points for the knee are
chosen based using similar method with the exception of the
early stance and mid stance. For early stance and mid stance,
a hyperextension equilibrium point of 5 degree is chosen
to produce an overall extension torque during full extension
to prevent the buckling of knee during load bearing. To ease
in the calibration process, the damping parameter is set to be
one-tenth of the stiffness parameter, leaving only a stiffness
parameter to be tuned for each period. The entire calibration
process took about three minutes.
Next to determine whether or not the LEAD is providing
assistance, the subject is asked to perform a walking trial on
the treadmill at 1km=h in each of the following conditions:
1) Unassisted
2) Assisted
3) Free
In the unassisted mode, the subject wears the LEAD
with only friction compensation for harmonic actuator [21]
implemented. Under the assisted condition, the subject wears
the LEAD with both the friction compensation and functional
assistive torque implemented. The free condition serves as a
control, where the subject walks without wearing the LEAD.
Each walking trial lasts 15 minutes. The subject’s heart
rate is measured at every 30 seconds interval with a heart
rate sensor (MN-01, Pulse Plus) as heart rate has been found
to be an accurate estimate of energy expenditure during
steady-state sub-maximal work in normal and disabled adults
engaged in walking [22]. A rest period of 30 minutes is given
to the subject before the start of each trial to ensure sufﬁcient
time for the heart rate to return to baseline. To determine the
resting heart rate, before the start of the ﬁrst trial, the subject
is seated and the heartbeat is measured for every 30 seconds
over a period of 5 minutes.
TABLE III
AVERAGE TRANSITION PERCENTAGES FOR GAIT PERIOD DETECTOR
Period
Transition
Transition of Typical
CGA (%)
Average Estimated
Transition (%)
1 to 2 12 17:24:03
2 to 3 50 50:32:69
3 to 4 62 60:03:87
4 to 5 75 72:74:04
5 to 6 85 87:32:30
TABLE IV
IMPEDANCE PARAMETERS
Gait Period
k(Nm=rad) b(Nm=rad s
 1
) 
0
(rad)
Hip Knee Hip Knee Hip Knee
Early Stance 22:9 11:5 2:3 1:1 0:0  0:087
Mid Stance 0:0 22:9 0:0 2:3 0:0  0:087
Late Stance 22:9 0:0 2:3 0:0 0:524 0:0
Early Swing 22:9 22:9 2:3 2:3 0:524 0:873
Mid Swing 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0 0:0
Late Swing 22:9 11:5 2:3 1:1 0:0 0:0
The control loop and data capturing rate of the LEAD is
set at 250 Hz for the above assisted trials.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
To validate the performance of the gait period detector,
the estimated period transition was normalized in terms of
percentage gait cycle and compared with the transition from
CGA studies done in [9], as shown in Table III. Average
estimated transition was found to be close to the typical CGA
transitions, with less than 5% deviation on average.
Table IV shows the calibrated impedance parameters for
each gait period. These parameters are implemented during
the assisted walking trial.
A segment of the data recorded during the assisted walking
trial is shown in Fig. 4. The top graph shows the gait period
found by the gait period detector. It is observed that the gait
period detector can effectively detect each gait period and the
gait periods transit sequentially in increasing order. However,
transitions to mid stance are skipped in 20:0% of the gait
cycles recorded. In these gait cycles, the gait period detector
transits from early stance to late stance directly. Nonetheless,
subject remains comfortable with the assistance provided.
The second and third graphs indicate the joint angles
and GRF respectively. Generally, the data are periodic with
minor cycle-to-cycle variation. When compared to unassisted
condition, the trajectory of the hip is not as smooth especially
during periods with addition of assistive torque. This is
attributed to the compliant of the attachment between the
user and device. Since the user is mainly pushing the device
during periods without assistive torques, while the addition
of assistive torque makes the device push the user instead.
249
Fig. 4. Estimated gait periods, sensors information and joint torque of a
user during 1 km=h walking with LEAD in assisted mode. (Gait periods
are labeled as follows, Early Stance = 1, Mid Stance = 2, Late Stance = 3,
Early Swing = 4, Mid Swing = 5 and Late Swing = 6)
The last two graphs show the assistive torque provided
by the LEAD at the hip and knee joint. The assistive
torques are continuous and smooth. It can be seen that the
LEAD generate ﬂexion and extension torques at the hip
appropriately based on the gait period detector. Peak ﬂexion
and extension assistive torque of the hip averages about
18Nm and 10Nm respectively. These correspond to 35:7%
and 19:8% of the respective peak hip ﬂexion and extension
torque of the subject during normal level walking based on
the subject’s weight and CGA data. Assistive ﬂexion and
extension torque at the knee could also be observed to aid in
walking. From the graph, assistive ﬂexion torque at the knee
could be seen during early swing to aid in the subject’s knee
ﬂexion. Moreover, an overall extension torque is generated
during early stance and mid stance which aids the subject in
weight bearing.
Fig. 5 shows the change of the subject’s heart rate with
time under each of the three conditions. In the ﬁrst three min-
utes, the heart rates for all three conditions are quite similar.
After which, the heart rate of the unassisted condition starts
to increase and stabilize after ﬁve minutes of walking. The
heart rate under the free condition appears to be relatively
ﬂat with a gentle upward slope throughout the entire walking
trial. In the assisted condition, the heart rates remain similar
to the free condition until about seven minutes, when the
heart rate starts decreasing and stabilizes at a lower rate after
nine minutes of walking.
Table V lists the average and standard deviation of heart
Fig. 5. Heart rate, in terms of beats per minute (bpm), during walking
trials under different conditions
TABLE V
AVERAGE AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF HEART RATE
Condition Heart Rate (bpm)
Unassisted 90:94:7
Assisted 64:45:6
Free 73:64:5
Baseline 62:82:0
rate under different conditions. Only the heart rates after the
ﬁrst ﬁve minutes are taken for the walking trials to eliminate
transient effects. The baseline heart rate was measured to be
62:8 bpm during the ﬁve minutes of rest.
The heart rate of walking under unassisted condition is
found to be signiﬁcantly higher (p< 0:05) than the heart rate
of walking under the free condition. This is not unexpected,
since the LEAD adds additional weight to the leg, and it was
found that net metabolic rate during walking increased with
leg-load magnitude and more distal leg-load location [23].
The heart rate of walking under assisted condition is found
to be signiﬁcantly lower (p < 0:05) than the heart rate of
walking under the unassisted condition. This indicates that
the user beneﬁts from proposed controller in walking, as less
effort is required to walk compared with the unassisted case.
Interestingly, the heart rate of walking under assisted
condition is also found to be signiﬁcantly lower (p< 0:05)
than the heart rate of walking in the free condition. The MIT
quasi-passive exoskeleton found an increase metabolism of
32% during assisted walking as compared to control [24]. In
[25], a 60% increase of energy consumption was found when
a prototype exoskeleton (EXO) was worn as compared with
the control condition. However, it is premature to conclude
that the walking with LEAD using the proposed method is
beneﬁcial over free walking. Most notably, the walking trials
in this study are at limited to 1 km=h, which is well below
the average walking speed of 5 km=h [26]. Free walking
with speeds less than the individual preferred walking speed
250
lead to higher energy consumption [27]. Nonetheless, the
LEAD under the proposed method has preliminarily shown
that it can effectively assist this subject in walking at speed
of 1 km=h.
Please note that this is only a pilot study to test the feasibil-
ity of the proposed controller. A larger study involving more
healthy subjects is currently being conducted. Concerning its
application for stroke rehabilitation, more studies needs to be
done on how the modiﬁed gait of stroke patient will affect
the results of the gait period detector.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we ﬁrst propose to provide functional task
assistance in subdivided gait periods during walking with
the lower extremity assistive device. A gait period detector
as well as assistance controller are introduced in details.
The proposed controller is validated via a healthy subject
experiment walking on treadmill, and the heart rate results
show it can assist the user effectively at speed of 1 km=h.
In the near future, we will evaluate the proposed assistance
controller with more healthy subjects as well as in gait
rehabilitation of stroke patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is under the project “Novel Rehabilitation De-
vice for Lower Extremities”. We acknowledge the ﬁnancial
support from the Singapore Ministry of Education (MOE)
Academic Research Fund (AcRF) (Grant No.: R-265-000-
419-112).
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Hausdorff, Z. Ladin, and J. Y . Wei, “Footswitch system for mea-
surement of the temporal parameters of gait,”JournalofBiomechanics,
vol. 28, pp. 347–351, 1995.
[2] I. P. I. Pappas, M. R. Popovic, T. Keller, V . Dietz, and M. Morari, “A
reliable gait phase detection system,” Neural Systems and Rehabilita-
tion Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 113–125,
2001.
[3] S. J. M. Bamberg, A. Y . Benbasat, D. M. Scarborough, D. E. Krebs,
and J. A. Paradiso, “Gait analysis using a shoe-integrated wireless
sensor system,” Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Trans-
actions on, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 413–423, 2008.
[4] I. D´ ıaz, J. J. Gil, and E. S´ anchez, “Lower-limb robotic rehabilitation:
Literature review and challenges,” Journal of Robotics, vol. 2011,
Article ID 759764, 11 pages, 2011. doi:10.1155/2011/759764.
[5] L. Marchal-Crespo and D. Reinkensmeyer, “Review of control strate-
gies for robotic movement training after neurologic injury,” Journal
of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 20, 2009.
[Online]. Available: http://www.jneuroengrehab.com/content/6/1/20
[6] H. Kawamoto and Y . Sankai, “Power assist method based on phase
sequence and muscle force condition for HAL,” Advanced Robotics,
vol. 19, pp. 717–734, 2005.
[7] C. J. Walsh, K. Endo, and H. Herr, “A quasi-passive leg exoskeleton
for load-carrying augmentation,” International Journal of Humanoid
Robotics, vol. 04, no. 03, pp. 487–506, 2007.
[8] B. Shen, J. Li, F. Bai, and C.-M. Chew, “Development and control
of a lower extremity assistive device (lead) for gait rehabilitation,” in
RehabilitationRobotics(ICORR),2013IEEEInternationalConference
on, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[9] J. Rose and J. G. Gamble, Human Walking, 3rd ed. Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins, 2006.
[10] M. W. Whittle, “Chapter 2-normal gait,” in Gait Analysis, 4th ed.
Edinburgh: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2007, pp. 47 – 100.
[11] B. Shen, J. Li, F. Bai, and C.-M. Chew, “Motion intent recognition for
control of a lower extremity assistive device (lead),” in Mechatronics
and Automation (ICMA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on,
2013, pp. 926–931.
[12] D. A. Reynolds, “Gaussian mixture models,” Encyclopedia of Biomet-
ric Recognition, Springer, February 2008.
[13] N. L. Johnson, S. Kotz, and N. Balakrishnan, Continuous Multivariate
Distributions, Models and Applications. ”John Wiley & Sons, Inc.”,
2002, vol. 1.
[14] T. K. Moon, “The expectation-maximization algorithm,” Signal Pro-
cessing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 47–60, 1996.
[15] N. Hogan, “Impedance control: an approach to manipulation,” in
American Control Conference, 1984, 1984, pp. 304–313.
[16] L. L. Cai, A. J. Fong, C. K. Otoshi, Y . Liang et al., “Implications
of assist-as-needed robotic step training after a complete spinal cord
injury on intrinsic strategies of motor learning,” The Journal of
Neuroscience, vol. 26, pp. 10 564–10 568, 2006.
[17] J. F. Veneman, R. Kruidhof, E. E. G. Hekman, R. Ekkelenkamp et al.,
“Design and evaluation of the LOPES exoskeleton robot for interactive
gait rehabilitation,” Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 379–386, 2007.
[18] R. Riener, L. Lunenburger, S. Jezernik, M. Anderschitz et al., “Patient-
cooperative strategies for robot-aided treadmill training: ﬁrst experi-
mental results,” Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 380–394, 2005.
[19] S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, “Active leg exoskeleton
(ALEX) for gait rehabilitation of motor-impaired patients,” in Re-
habilitation Robotics, 2007. ICORR 2007. IEEE 10th International
Conference on, 2007, pp. 401–407.
[20] S. A. Hesse, M. T. Jahnke, C. M. Bertelt, C. Schreiner et al.,
“Gait outcome in ambulatory hemiparetic patients after a 4-week
comprehensive rehabilitation program and prognostic factors,” Stroke,
vol. 25, no. 10, pp. 1999–2004, 1994.
[21] J. Li, B. Shen, F. Bai, C. M. Chew, and C. L. Teo, “First implemen-
tation results on FAT based adaptive control for a lower extremity
rehabilitation device,” in Mechatronics and Automation (ICMA), 2013
International Conference on, 2013, pp. 945–950.
[22] P. Astrand and K. Rodahl, Textbook of Work Physiology. New York:
McGraw and Hill, 1970.
[23] R. C. Browning, J. R. Modica, R. Kram, and A. Goswami, “The effects
of adding mass to the legs on the energetics and biomechanics of
walking,” Ergonomics, vol. 53, no. 10, pp. 1263–1275, 2010.
[24] C. J. Walsh, D. Paluska, K. Pasch, W. Grand et al., “Development
of a lightweight, underactuated exoskeleton for load-carrying augmen-
tation,” in Robotics and Automation, 2006. ICRA 2006. Proceedings
2006 IEEE International Conference on, 2006, pp. 3485–3491.
[25] K. N. Gregorczyk, L. Hasselquist, J. M. Schiffman, C. K. Benseletal.,
“Effects of a lower-body exoskeleton device on metabolic cost and gait
biomechanics during load carriage,” Ergonomics, vol. 53, no. 10, pp.
1263–1275, 2010.
[26] R. C. Browning, E. A. Baker, J. A. Herron, and R. Kram, “Effects of
obesity and sex on the energetic cost and preferred speed of walking,”
Journal of Applied Physiology, vol. 100, pp. 390–398, 2006.
[27] H. J. Ralston, “Energy-speed relation and optimal speed during level
walking,” Internationale Zeitschrift f¨ ur angewandte Physiologie ein-
schließlich Arbeitsphysiologie, vol. 17, pp. 277–283, 1958.
251
