Generation of Human Standing-up Motion with Muscle Synergies
Using Forward Dynamic Simulation
Qi An
1
, Yuki Ishikawa
1
, Tetsuro Funato
2
, Shinya Aoi
3
, Hiroyuki Oka
4
,
Hiroshi Yamakawa
1
, Atsushi Yamashita
1
, and Hajime Asama
1
Abstract— The standing-up motion is one of the most im-
portant activities of daily livings. In order to understand
the strategy to achieve the standing-up motion, muscle syn-
ergy analysis is applied to the measured data during human
standing-up motion. In addition, musculoskeletal model which
consists of three body segments and nine muscles in lower limb
is developed to ensure that the standing-up motion can be gen-
erated by muscle synergies. As a result, three muscle synergies
have been extracted from the human standing-up motion, and
each synergy strongly corresponded to characteristic kinematic
events: momentum ﬂexion, momentum transfer, and posture
stabilization. Results of forward dynamic simulation show that
the standing-up motion can be achieved by controlling time-
varying weighting coefﬁcient of three muscle synergies instead
of controlling individual nine muscles.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of the elderly people has increasing rapidly,
and it has brought many serious issues to our society, such as
decreased physical ability or increased social security cost.
It is important to improve functional mobility of the elderly
in order to avoid being bedridden and enhance their quality
of life. Among the daily activities, especially the functional
ability to perform the standing-up motion is an important
criteria of activities of daily living [1].
We have developed the assistive device to support joint
torque of the elderly people [2]. However, adding deﬁcient
joint force cannot fully improve the functional ability. In
areas of medical or physical therapy, many training method-
ologies have been used to strengthen muscles, but it has been
reported that increase of muscle strength is only seen in the
same posture that people perform the training [3]. The study
implies that training strongly depends on the environment
or its context when the training is performed. Moreover,
the importance of training multiple joints movement or
muscles is pointed out for improvement of body function [4].
Therefore, it is necessary to understand how the standing-up
motion is performed by clarifying the condition to achieve
the standing-up motion or understanding the strategy to
perform the motion in order to enhance the ability of it.
1
Qi An, Yuki Ishikawa, Hiroshi Yamakawa, Atsushi Yamashita, and
Hajime Asama are with Department of Precision Engineering, Graduate
School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 1138656, Japan
anqi@robot.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
2
Tetsuro Funato is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and
Intelligent Systems, The University of Electro-Communications, Tokyo,
Japan
3
Shinya Aoi is with the Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
Graduate School of Engineering, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan
4
Hiroyuki Oka is with the 22nd Century Medical and Research Center,
Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Regarding the standing-up motion, many previous studies
have focused on kinematic characteristics. For example,
Shenkman et al. have divided the standing-up motion into
four phases based on kinematic events: forward movement of
shoulder (momentum ﬂexion), rising hip (momentum trans-
fer), minimum ankle doriﬂexion (extension), and maximum
shoulder height (posture stabilization) [5].
In order to elucidate the mechanism of the standing-up
motion, we have focused on the idea of muscle synergies.
The idea of muscle synergy was ﬁrstly suggested by Bern-
stein [6] to decompose the complex human movement into
small sets of modules of synchronized muscle activation
(muscle synergy). Some previous studies have employed the
muscle synergy analysis to show that basic movement of the
frogs can be explained with common muscle synergies [7].
Additionally it has been shown that human locomotion can
be achieved by ﬁve muscle synergies [8].
If there are muscle synergies in human standing-up mo-
tion, it would be useful knowledge for a training method-
ology. Also, contribution of muscle synergies to body kine-
matics should be clariﬁed to elucidate the strategy of hu-
man standing-up motion. Previously, we have analyzed the
standing-up motion with muscle synergies and their contri-
bution was simulated from musculoskeletal model which is
expressed as the neural network model [9]. Although this
model could express relationship between muscle activation,
joint torques, and body kinematics, it did not consider the
effect of anatomical characteristics or dynamics of body.
The objectives of this study are to develop a muscu-
loskeletal model which involves human body dynamics and
anatomical characteristics of muscle and to clarify that
human standing-up motion is generated from a small number
of muscle synergies using forward dynamic simulation.
II. METHODS
A. Synergy Model
This study assumes that muscle activation of human move-
ment is generated from muscle synergies and time-varying
weighting coefﬁcients (eq. (1)).
A
?
= WC: (1)
In the equation, A indicates the matrix of discrete time-
varying activation of n muscles (1 ≤ t ≤ T
max
) as shown
in eq. (2). Muscle synergy matrix W consists of N muscle
synergy vector w
j( j=1;2;···;N)
and its component w
i j
indicates
i-th muscle activation of j-th muscle synergy (eq. (3)).
Weighting coefﬁcient matrix C is composed of the vectors
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 730
torques (T
FB
) (eq. (9)). In the equation, R indicates matrix
of muscles moment arm expressed as in eq. (10). Com-
ponents of the matrix R indicate the moment arm r
ki
of
muscle i(i= TA;GAS;SOL;RF;V AS;BFL;BFS;IL;GMAX)
to the joint k. Moment arm r
ki
is zero if the muscle i is
not attached to the joint k, otherwise moment arm r
ki
takes
either positive or negative values depending on how muscles
contribute to each joint (extension or ﬂexion). Moment arm
length is considered to be constant regardless of the body
posture. F consists of muscular tensions generated from each
muscle ([F
1
;F
2
;··· ;F
n
]
T
).
T
JNT
= RF(L
i
;
˙
L
i
;a
i
)+ T
FB
; (9)
R =
0
B
@
r
11
··· r
1n
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
r
31
··· r
3n
1
C
A ; (10)
r
ki
=
8
>
<
>
:
0 (no attachment)
r
ki
(extension)
?r
ki
(ﬂexion)
: (11)
To calculate muscle tension, Hill type muscle model is
used [11]. It consists of three elements: contractile element
(CE) and parallel elements (PE and PD). The muscular
tension generated in CE, PE, and PD of muscle i ( f
CE
i
, f
PD
i
,
and f
PE
i
) is calculated from eqs. (13–15).
F
i
(L
i
;
˙
L
i
;a
i
) = f
CE
i
+ f
PD
i
+ f
PE
i
; (12)
f
CE
i
= F
CE
i
h(L
i
)k(
˙
L
i
)a
i
; (13)
f
PD
i
= c
PD
i
˙
L
i
; (14)
f
PE
i
= k
PE
i
(exp[15(L
i
? L
i
)]? 1); (15)
dL
i
= r
ki
dq
k
: (16)
In the Hill type muscle model, CE generates tension
based on muscle excitation level (a
i
), muscle length (L
i
)
and muscular velocity (
˙
L
i
). In the eq. (13), F
CE
i
is the
maximum isometric force, L
i
is the rest muscle length, h(L
i
)
indicates length-tension relationship and k(
˙
L
i
) is velocity-
tension relationship. However, muscle length of CE is ﬁxed
to the rest length in this paper.
On the other hand, muscle length of PE and PD varies ac-
cording to the joint angles. PE is the elastic component which
generates contraction tension when muscles are extended.
PD is the damping component which generates tension in
proportion to muscular velocity. Changes in muscular length
(dL
i
) are calculated from moment arm r
ki
and change of joint
angle q
k
from its neutral position as in eq. (16) [12].
The additional torque (T
FB
) is generated on the joints
in order for the model to be stabilized and follow human
standing-up motion. T
FB
is determined by PD control.
Joint damping coefﬁcients (x
1k···6k
and d
k
), moment arm of
the muscles (r
ki
), kinetic and damping parameters of muscles
(k
PE
i
and c
PD
i
), maximum isometric force (F
CE
i
) and rest
muscle length (L
i
) are decided from the previous study [13].
C. Generation of Motion
In the study, ﬁrstly joint torques are computed with the
same link model explained in the previous section by inverse
dynamics using measured body trajectories and reaction
force. These joint torques are used to determine the amount
of muscular tension which is necessary to achieve the motion.
Joint torques are decomposed to each muscle activation, but
muscle activation cannot be determined exclusively since the
musculoskeletal system includes bi-articular muscles (GAS,
RF, and BFL) and one of the muscles (IL) cannot be mea-
sured due to the inner muscle. Therefore, muscle activation
(a
?
i
) is calculated by optimization to minimize the following
squared error (Z) from the measured muscle activation (a
i
).
Z =
1
2
||a
?
i
? a
i
||
2
: (17)
We conduct forward dynamic simulations to calculate
body kinematics of human standing-up motion. When initial
body posture is given, body kinematics is repeatedly calcu-
lated from the current body posture and muscular torques
generated on the joint. As described in the previous section,
muscular torque is mainly calculated from muscle activation
which is generated from muscle synergies w
j
and their
time-varying weighting coefﬁcient c
j
. In this paper, muscle
synergies w
j
are ﬁxed and only time-varying weighting
coefﬁcients c
j
are input to the musculoskeletal model to
obtain body kinematics. For numerical simulation, fourth
ordered Runge-Kutta method is used when dt is set to 0.001s.
III. EMPIRICAL EXPERIMENTS WITH HUMANS
Optimal motion capture system (MAC3D) with eight
cameras (HMK-80; Motion Analysis Corp.) was used to
measure body trajectories in 200Hz. Measured body parts
were decided based on Helen Hayse marker set, and joint
angles were calculated from the software (SIMM; Muscu-
loGraphics Corp.) The forceplate (Nitta Corp.) was used to
measure reaction force from the hip in 64Hz. Using DL-3100
(S&ME Corp.), muscle activation was measured in 1,000Hz
from eight muscles of the right leg (TA, SOL, GAS, RF, V AS,
BFL, BFS, GMAX) since sagittal movement is focused.
Data 1.0s before and 2.25s after the time when the subject
rises hip is used. All data is ﬁltered with second order butter
worth low-pass ﬁlter in 10, 25, and 25Hz respectively for
body kinematics, reaction force, and muscle activation. In ad-
dition, muscle activation is centred, rectiﬁed, and normalized
with minimum and maximum values during the experiment.
One participant (twenty-seven years old male, height:
1.77m, weight: 80kg) has participated in our experiment,
and seventeen trials of standing-up motion were recorded.
Chair height was set to the knee height and he was asked
to have his arms crossed in front of his chest. Speed of the
motion is not controlled clearly, but he was asked to perform
the motion in comfortable speed. Before starting experiment,
we have explained detail of the experiment, and consent was
obtained. This study was conducted with approval by the
Institute Review Board (IRB) of the University of Tokyo.
IV. RESULTS
A. Extracted Muscle Synergies
In this study, a
?
i
is calculated from inverse dynamics and
optimization from measured body trajectories, reaction force,
732
and muscle activation of seventeen trials. Muscle synergies
are extracted individually from seventeen trials of muscle
activation a
?
i
. Figure 3 shows mean squared error between
observed muscle activation patterns and reconstructed ac-
tivations from muscle synergy model. Error bars indicate
standard deviation of squared error. As a results of ANOV A,
there was a signiﬁcant difference in squared error according
to the number of synergies. Then, post-hoc analysis was
applied to each neighboring number of synergies. It was
obtained that there was a signiﬁcant difference between
one and two, and two and three. Therefore it is suggested
that adding more muscle synergies would not improve the
performance to represent muscle activation. In this study,
the number of synergies was set to three.
Figure 4 indicates three extracted synergies from seventeen
trials of the standing-up motion. Figures 4 (a, c, e) illustrate
muscle activations included in each muscle synergy; separate
bars show different muscle synergies of individual trials.
Black solid bars show mean activation of each muscles.
On the other hand, time-varying weighting coefﬁcients
for each synergies are shown in Figs. 4 (b, d, f); thick
sold lines show mean of time-varying weighting coefﬁcients,
and dashed lines indicate single trial of them. The vertical
black lines indicates characteristic kinematic events during
human standing-up motion reported in the previous study
[5]: forward movement of shoulder (I: ﬂexion momentum
phase), rising hip (II: momentum transfer phase), minimum
ankle dorsiﬂexion (III: extension), and maximum shoulder
height (IV: posture stabilization phase).
B. Forward Dynamic Simulation
Link parameters for forward dynamic simulation are de-
scribed in Table I: link length, mass, and position of center
of mass, inertial moment. Link length is determined based on
the measurement of a subject, and other parameters are de-
cided based on the standard human body data [14]. Position
of center mass indicates ratio of length from proximal end
of the body. Proportional gain and differential gain for PD
control to calculate T
FB
were 200 and 50 in this study. Target
trajectories of PD control is set to the average measured
body kinematics. Coefﬁcients of two elastic elements in the
ﬂoor model were set to 6000 and 7000N/m for horizontal
and vertical directions in this study. Initial body posture for
0
200
400
600
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Mean Squared Error
Number of Muscle Synergies
* *
Fig. 3. Squares Error between Observed and Simulated Muscle Activation
forward dynamic simulation is decided from beginning of
average measured body kinematics.
During forward dynamic simulation, muscle synergy is
ﬁxed to the mean of synergies extracted from seventeen trials
which is depicted as black bars in Fig. 4 (a, c, e).
Figures 5 (a)–(c) show results of generated three joint
angles. The black solid lines show the joint angles generated
from forward dynamic simulation whereas the red dashed
lines show the mean of measured joint angles.
Figures 5 (d)–(f) show results of joint torques generated to
each joint; the black solid lines indicate torques generated by
muscles (RF) whereas the red dashed lines indicate torques
to stabilize posture (T
FB
). The ratio of joint torques to
stabilize posture (T
FB
) to torques actuated in joint angles
(T
JNT
) is 0.92, 0.49, and 7.7% for foot, knee and hip joints.
Figure 5 (g) shows comparison between simulated reaction
force in the forward dynamic simulation and measured
reaction forces in the horizontal and vertical directions. The
red solid and dashed lines show forces in the horizontal
direction. The black solid and dashed lines with circle
markers illustrate simulated and measured reaction forces in
the vertical direction.
Table II shows the coefﬁcient of determination between
simulated and measured joint angles and reaction forces.
It is implied that the standing-up motion is successfully
realized from forward dynamic simulation in terms of body
kinematics and reaction force from the chair.
Figure 5 (h) shows stick picture of generated motion. Each
stick picture shows body posture of every 0.25s.
V. DISCUSSION
As a result, three muscle synergies are identiﬁed from
human standing-up motion and correspond time-varying
weighting coefﬁcients are determined. Through the gen-
eration of the standing-up motion using forward dynamic
simulation, it is conﬁrmed that three muscle synergies are
able to realize the standing-up motion rather than controlling
individual muscles. Since posture stabilization torque (T
FB
)
is relatively small compared to the total joint torque (7.7%
at most), the standing-up motion is mainly generated from
coordination of each muscles.
Figures 4 (b, d, f) show that muscle synergies are activated
in chronological order, and their time-varying weighting co-
TABLE I
LINK PARAMETERS
Shank Thigh HAT
Length [m] 0.50 0.40 0.80
Mass [kg] 8.50 18.7 56.1
Center of Mass Position 0.41 0.42 0.20
Intertial Moment [kgm
2
] 0.48 0.13 3.36
TABLE II
COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION
Vertical Horizontal Ankle Knee Hip
Reaction Force Reaction Force Angle Angle Angle
0.997 0.994 0.999 0.999 0.972
733
efﬁcients clearly corresponded to the characteristic kinematic
events deﬁned in the previous study [5]. Figure 4 (b) shows
the duration of muscle synergy 1 is between Phases I and
II. Therefore it is implied that the ﬁrst synergy works to
ﬂex their upper body to generate momentum. On the other
hand, the maximum activation of the second synergy (Fig. 4
(d)) is found in the time when humans rise their hip (Phase
II), and it continues during Phase II and III. It implies
that the second synergy works as lifting up their hip and
move trunk upward. Compared to other synergies, the third
synergy (Fig. 4 (f)) has the maximum activation at the
beginning of the Phase IV . It suggests that the last synergy
has contribution toward posture stabilization. These results
suggest that muscle synergies are related to the kinematic
event during the standing-up motion, and synergies have own
contribution toward body movement.
Currently, the function of posture stabilization is included
in terms of joint torques T
FB
. However, humans usually
balance their posture according to the sensory feedback from
sensation of environmental changes. It will be necessary to
implement the sensory feedback function to stabilize posture
instead of joint torques T
FB
.
One of the reason for the hip joint to have the larger
error than the other joints is because of illiopsoas (IL) which
is ﬂexor of the hip joint. Since IL is an inner muscle and
cannot be measured in the experiment, muscle activation of
IL is only estimated. Measuring additional muscles which
contribute to hip ﬂexor would improve the accuracy of our
musculoskeletal model.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, a musculoskeletal model which considers
human body dynamics and anatomical characteristics of mus-
cles has been developed. Muscle activations of nine muscles
in lower limb are decomposed into three muscle synergies.
It has been shown that the standing-up motion could be
generated by controlling time-varying weighting coefﬁcient
corresponded to extracted muscle synergies. Additionally
it is implied that time-varying weighting coefﬁcients are
corresponded to characteristic kinematic events. The ﬁrst
synergy is activated when humans move shoulder forward
(ﬂexion momentum). The second synergy is strongly acti-
vated when people rises hip (momentum transfer). The third
synergy has characteristic peak at the time when the highest
shoulder position is achieved (posture stabilization). This
result implies that human standing-up motion is composed
of three muscle synergies.
Current study has employed the normalized situation to
measure the standing-up motion, and the effect of link
parameters is limited. Therefore structure of muscle syn-
ergies are thought to be similar among individuals, but
different environment would affect the extracted synergies.
For example, it is known that the standing-up motion is
affected by the change of chair height or feet position. It
will be interesting direction to investigate if muscle synergies
are consistent in the environmental changes or humans need
additional synergies to perform an adaptive motion.
Another important future direction is implementation of
our ﬁndings into new training methods. If humans lose or
forget the certain synergy due to injury or disease, they
need to regain or relearn it. The previous study implies
that if humans want to learn a new synergy, it would be
the best to ﬁrstly try to use another existing synergy [15].
If there are similar synergies found in other movements,
humans would be able to utilize these synergies by repeating
the same movement. Otherwise, humans need to train and
reconstruct it again. In terms of standing-up motion, it is
implied that humans need to learn both speciﬁc muscle
activation included in muscle synergies and how to switch
muscle synergies based on kinematic phases. Therefore the
new assistive method should focus on teaching how to
manage synergies as well as adding deﬁcient torques.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was in part supported by the MEXT KAK-
ENHI, Gtant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research (B) 24300198,
JST RISTEX Service Science, Solutions and Foundation
Integrated Research Program, and Grant-in-Aid for JSPS
Fellows 24·8702.
REFERENCES
[1] Alexander NB, Schultz AB, and Warwick DN, “Rising from a Chair:
Effects of Age and Functional Ability on Performance Biomechanics”,
J. Gerontol., vol. 46, pp. 91-98, 1991.
[2] Chugo D, Kawabata K, Okamoto H, Kaetsu H, Asama H, Miyake N,
and Kosuge K, “Force Assistance System for Standing-up Motion”,
Ind. Robot, vol. 34, pp. 128-134, 2007.
[3] Sale DG and MacDougall JD, “Speciﬁcity in Strength Training; a
Review for the Coach and Athlete”, Can. J. Appl. Sports Sci., vol. 6,
pp. 87-92, 1981.
[4] Rutherford OM, “Muscular Coordination and Strength Training Im-
plications for Injury Rehabilitation”, Sports Medicine, vol. 4, pp. 196-
202, 1988.
[5] Schenkman M, Berger RA, Patrick OR, Mann RW, and Hodge WA,
“Whole-body Movements during Rising to Standing from Sitting”,
Phys. Ther., vol. 70, pp. 638-651, 1990.
[6] Bernstein N, “The Co-ordination and Regulation of Movement”,
Pergamon, Oxford, 1967.
[7] d’Avella A and Bizzi E, “Shared and Speciﬁc Muscle Synergies in
Natural Motor Behaviors”, PNAS, vol. 102, pp. 3076-3081, 2005.
[8] Ivanenko YP, Poppele RE, and Lacquaniti F, “Five Basic Muscle
Activation Patterns Account for Muscle Activity during Human Lo-
comotion”, J. Physiol., vol. 556, pp. 267-282, 2004.
[9] An Q, Ikemoto Y , and Asama H, “Synergy Analysis of Sit-to-Stand in
Young and Elderly People”, J. of Robot. and Mech., vol. 25, pp. 1038-
1049, 2013.
[10] Lee DD and Seun HS, “Learning the Parts of Objects by Non-Negative
Matrix Factorization”, Nature, vol. 401, pp. 788-791, 1999.
[11] Zajac FE, ‘ ‘Muscle and Tendon: Properties, Models, Scaling, and
Application to Biomechanics and Motor Control”, Critical Reviews in
Biomedical Engineering, vol. 17, pp. 359-411, 1989.
[12] Melissa GH, Felix EZ and Michael EG, “A Musculoskeletal Model
of the Human Lower Extremity: The Effect of Muscle, Tendon, and
Moment Arm on the Moment-Angle Relationship of Musculotendon
Actuators at the Hip, Knee, and Ankle”, J. Biomech., vol. 23, pp. 157-
169, 1990.
[13] Davy DT and Audu, ML, “A Dynamic Optimization Technique for
Predicting Muscle Forces in the Swing Phase of Gait”, J. Biomech.,
vol. 20, pp. 187-201, 1987.
[14] Clauser CE, McConville JT, and Young JW, “Weight, V olume, and
Center of Mass of Segments of Human Body”, Wright-Patterson Air
Force Basem Ohion, AMRL Technical Report, pp. 69-70, 1969.
[15] Richard GC, “Changes in Muscle Coordination with Training”, J. of
Appl. Phys., vol. 101, pp. 1506-1513, 2006.
735
