A Compliant Underactuated Hand with Suction Flow
for Underwater Mobile Manipulation
Hannah S. Stuart, Shiquan Wang, Bayard Gardineer, David L. Christensen, Daniel M. Aukes, Mark Cutkosky
Center for Design Research ? Stanford University ? Stanford, CA 94305-2232, USA
Abstract? Fingertip suction is investigated using a compliant,
underactuated, tendon-driven hand designed for underwater
mobile manipulation. Tendon routing and joint stiffnesses are
designed to provide ease of closure while maintaining nger
rigidity, allowing the hand to pinch small objects, as well as
secure large objects, without diminishing strength. While the
hand is designed to grasp a range of objects, the addition of light
suction ow to the ngertips is especially effective for small, low-
friction (slippery) objects. Numerical simulations conrm that
changing suction parameters can increase the object acquisition
region, providing guidelines for future versions of the hand.
I. INTRODUCTION
Diving is a dangerous occupation. Not only are divers sus-
ceptible to drowning, hypothermia, and decompression sick-
ness but these risks are exacerbated by strenuous work, ex-
tended dive length, and dive frequency. Occupational divers
may be expected to direct large machinery and handle power
tools, such as underwater cutters and welders, which heighten
the risk. The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics recorded in
2011 that divers were subject to 38 times the average
national occupational death rate (about 3.5 in 100,000)
1
. An
underwater humanoid robot could potentially perform many
of the manual tasks that human divers perform today while
providing an intuitive platform for remote operation.
The application for the hand described in this paper is a
new underwater robot intended for exploration and biological
research in coral reef zones in the Red Sea. The robot, which
is being developed through a collaboration between the King
Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Red Sea Research Center
2
, Meka Robotics
3
, and Stanford
University, will allow marine biologists to remain above
water while obtaining specimens, positioning equipment, and
performing other monitoring and maintenance tasks down to
100 m below the surface, at pressures up to 11 bar.
As in other examples of mobile manipulation, it is desir-
able for hands to be robust and compliant. The hand should
also be low-mass because it will contribute disproportion-
ately to the arm inertia and is the most frequent site of
contact (intentional and accidental) with the environment.
Accordingly, the hand is compliant, underactuated, and back-
drivable and uses exures instead of pin joints, subsequently
reducing mechanical complexity. In this regard, it shares
similarities with other compliant hands designed for mobile
manipulation including [1]?[8]. The particular requirement
1
http://www.bls.gov/iif/oshcfoi1.htm
2
http://rsrc.kaust.edu.sa
3
http://mekabot.com
Fig. 1: Examples of the hand prototype grasping a small object (below) and
a large tube (inset) underwater.
of grasping small, delicate and slippery objects has led to
the incorporation of a gentle suction ow at the ngertips to
enhance the region of object acquisition in water.
In the following sections, we describe the grasping require-
ments that govern the design of the hand, including the num-
ber and orientation of ngers, joint stiffnesses, and tendon
routing schemes. Given the large space of congurations and
parameters, it is infeasible to perform a global optimization.
In addition to force and compliance analyses, fast dynamic
simulations are useful for rapidly evaluating different hand
designs as they interact with objects underwater. We briey
describe the analysis approach, which is adapted from [9],
including a new model of ngertip suction that enlarges
the acquisition region. We next describe suction experiments
conducted in water and conclude with a discussion of lessons
learned for the next iteration of this underwater hand.
II. GRASPING AND MANIPULATION REQUIREMENTS
This project species that the robot must be able to
perform certain tasks: sample delicate live specimens, like
deep-sea sponges; collect coral samples using a chisel and
hammer; deploy and position long-term sensing equipment or
structures; retrieve samples below overhangs and in crevices;
and, operate tools designed for human divers. Therefore, this
hand must be able to perform enveloping, secure grasps
as well as precision, sensitive pinch grasps (which are
inherently less stable). Using established grasp taxonomies
[10,11], the essential grasp types can be identied to meet
the remote manipulation needs. A large diameter and small
diameter heavy wrap, as well as a medium prismatic wrap,
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6691
can achieve many of the equipment grasping requirements
on, for example, chisels, pipes and cutting tools. A delicate
two-ngered pinch can account for soft, slippery organic
sample handling. The versatility of these grasps provides
a range of stability or sensitivity to choose from when
manipulating objects of various shape and surface friction.
III. HAND AND FINGER DESIGN
The requirements of achieving both wrap and pinch grasps
on large and small objects in a highly unstructured environ-
ment have led to the choice of a hand with four ngers,
each driven by a single actuator. While a three-ngered hand
could achieve most of the desired grasp types, it would have
less stability when handling long cylindrical objects. The
two pairs of compliant opposed ngers are slightly offset
so that, in addition to pinching small objects (Fig. 1), they
can bend laterally and slide past each other under large grasp
forces to produce an interlaced grasp (Fig. 1(inset) and Fig.
2(right)). This solution is simpler and easier to waterproof
than a recongurable palm, as used in some other hands [9].
One drawback with xed ngers is the inability to perform
as many in-hand manipulations. The current nger locations
also allow small objects to escape from a wrap grasp.
A. Tendon routing and return springs
A critical requirement in the design of underactuated
ngers is to obtain the right balance, at each conguration,
of joint torques due to the tendon and the passive stiffness
elements. A known concern is to prevent premature curling
of the ngers, which makes it difcult to grasp small objects
in a pinch grasp. Solutions can include actuating the nger
with linkages, modifying the effective transmission ratios
of the cables, using variable stiffness springs, or using
Fig. 2: Palm layout (left). The exures can twist allowing the ngers to
interlace for a wrap grasp (right).
Fig. 3: Finger cross section, tendon routing, and nger hardware details.
secondary cables in the nger mechanism [12]?[15]. In the
present case, a simple, water-resistant solution is desired.
The nger stiffness at each joint is determined by a com-
bination of the elastomeric exure and an external extension
spring, implemented with elastic bands in the prototype, as
shown in Fig. 3. In general, for stability and resistance to
external forces, the proximal joints should be stiff. However,
this can lead to premature curling of the distal joints as the
hand closes, unless the distal joints are even stiffer. As joint
stiffnesses are increased, the ability of the hand to apply large
grasp forces is reduced because the actuators continually
work against the hand's own springs. To overcome these
effects and decrease exure stiffness, there is a second set
of extension springs on the back side of each nger.
In addition, the tendon does not wrap around a pulley
at the joint and, instead, acts upon the joint exure with
a variable geometry. This is accomplished with polished
stainless steel dowel pins which are installed at each entry
and exit location of the tendon on each phalanx, as well as
at all tendon direction changes in the base of the nger. This
reduces friction and tendon wear considerably as compared
to rubbing against the bare 3D printed material. As the hand
closes, the effective lever arm of the tendon increases along
with mechanical advantage and grasp force capabilities. The
tendon terminates at a pulley in the base of the nger which
is driven by a motor on the other side of a shaft seal. This
modular design allows the nger to be removed or broken
without compromising the waterproof seal of the palm.
Figure 4 shows a simplied model with lumped-parameter
stiffness elements that can be used to determine relative
stiffnesses and dimensions of a joint. Because the exures
are short and soft compared to the phalanges, it sufces to
approximate them at this stage with pin joints, although more
accurate models are available [16]. Using vision and markers,
we experimentally veried that the proximal phalanx's center
of rotation is approximately xed throughout the range of
motion of interest, similar to [3]. The termination points of
the tendon and extension springs are also assumed to be
constant although there are small variations due to rolling
contact and compliance.
The moment arms, or effective radii, of the tendon (
  !
R
f
)
and extension spring (
  !
R
e
) are dened as the position vectors
Fig. 4: Simplied joint model using lumped-parameter stiffness elements.
6692
perpendicular to the tendon or spring from B
o
, such that:
R
f
=



  !
R
f


 =





  !
r
Bo=B
f

  !
r
A
f
=B
f


  !
r
A
f
=B
f







(1)
R
e
=



  !
R
e


 =





  !
r
Bo=Be

  !
r
Ae=Be


  !
r
Ae=Be







(2)
with the notation dened such that
  !
r
A=B
is the position
vector to point A from point B.
The stretch S is the distance between A
e
and B
e
minus
the natural length of the spring s
n
until the spring makes
contact with the exure, in which case a point contact is
assumed at B
c
, where
  !
r
Bc=Bo
=
1
2
h
  !
R
e



  !
R
e



S =
8
>
<
>
:


  !
r
Ae=Be


 s
n
,



  !
R
e


>
1
2
h


  !
r
Ae=Bc


+


  !
r
Be=Bc


 s
n
,



  !
R
e



1
2
h:
9
>
=
>
;
(3)
After solving these trigonometric equations using Motion-
Genesis?, it is straightforward to calculate the moments
applied to each joint by the exure, extension spring, and
tendon given any angle:
  !
M
B=B0
=
h


  !
R
e


k
spring
S 



  !
R
f


T
i
b a
z
(4)
where k
spring
is the stiffness of the extension spring and T
is the magnitude of the tendon tension force.
As seen in Fig. 1, the varying extension spring and tendon
effective radii allow for pinching small objects and wrapping
around large objects. As demonstrated in Fig. 5, with variable
R
e
andR
f
, there is a moderate initial tendon force to prevent
sagging due to gravity, buoyancy, or strong water ow in
the open position, without requiring a large tendon force to
overcome the nger stiffness when the nger is curled.
Fig. 5: Tendon tension required to hold the middle joint in static equilibrium
over its range of joint angles. This comparison was conducted using the
measured average stiffness of the middle joint. Constant radii equivalents
were calculated by averaging the radii of the nonlinear case over the range
of angular displacement.
Fig. 6: Detail of the joint exures with dimensions (top left). Demonstration
of nger curl, from proximal to distal (main).
Fig. 7: (A) Water owing away from the object-hand interface during
grasping can push the object away, reducing grasp success. (B) Through
holes can alleviate the effects of the instability demonstrated in (A). (C) If
suction ow is applied to the nger hole, a stable position for the object is
created at the nger surface to improve grasp success.
B. Flexure Design
Simplied rotational stiffness for the urethane exure
joints is characterized using large-deection analysis for a
beam with a moment end load [17].
k
flex
=
M

=
EI
L
(5)
where the I is the moment of inertia, M is the moment
applied to the free end of a cantilevered beam, is the angle
of the end of the beam with respect to the base,L is the arc
length of the beam, and E is the Young's modulus. Flexure
stiffness is therefore a function of the geometry detailed in
Fig. 6. Although E is not constant with large deection, we
experimentally veried that exure stiffness is approximately
constant for this specic design. More detailed material
modeling of the exure will be a part of future work.
C. Suction System
Underwater grasping provides additional challenges as
compared to manipulation in air. Not only does object
buoyancy become a signicant factor in grasping, but as the
nger approaches the object uid interactions tend to push
the object away, making grasping more difcult (Fig. 7).
Mitigating or reversing this interaction can improve grasping,
especially for light, small objects. For example, oceanic
feeding sh employ local suction ow to catch mobile prey
[18,19]. Accordingly, a slight suction ow was built into
the ngertips to assist the ngers in acquiring and pinching
6693
delicate or slippery objects. Suction is applied to through-
holes from the back side of the nger, with tubing running up
the hand to an external pump. The ow rate is kept relatively
low, to prevent disturbing the local environment or acquiring
undesired objects in the vicinity. An additional membrane
may prevent aspirating dirt or silt. In comparison to suckers
[20], this suction ow does not rely on forming a seal.
D. Fabrication
The hand prototype was fabricated using a combination
of 3D printing and casting similar to the approach used for
[6,21]. The ngers were printed using a Projet 3500 3D
Printer out of Visijet Crystal. The exure molds were printed
between the phalanges to make each nger one continuous
piece. The dog-bone shaped exures (Figs. 3 & 6) were
then cast in urethane (Smooth-on PMC 780, with Young's
modulus of approximately 2.76 MPa). Stress-concentrating
grooves were included around the mold walls such that they
would easily break away, leaving a smooth joint exure.
IV. MODELING AND SIMULATION
While analytic models can be used to explore the mapping
from actuator effort to grasp forces and to evaluate grasp
quality, they must be reformulated whenever contacts are
made or broken, which can happen with any change in the
variables that govern how the ngers close upon an object.
A dynamic simulation package can be useful for evaluating
hand designs and should be designed to detect and respond
efciently to changes in contact conditions and friction. As
in [5,9], the simulation presented here is based on Moby
[22]. In the present application, in addition to the masses,
object buoyancy, tendon forces, joint stiffnesses, and friction,
suction must be accounted for as well. The general uid
dynamics are too complex for inclusion, but a simplied
Fig. 8: Simulator structure.
Fig. 9: Simulation rendering displaying the relative positions of the object's
center of mass and the polygon of connected joint vertices in the case of a
closed/successful (left) and open (right) grasp. In the closed case, simulation
speed can be accelerated by assuming grasp success. In the open case, this
assumption is abandoned and the simulator must wait until the nger and
object settle.
model of the effects of drag and suction is necessary since
such forces inuence object behavior near the ngertips.
The simulation structure is shown in Figure 8. The object
controller calculates the forces, including any drag or suction
forces, on the object for each computing cycle, based on the
object's position and velocity. The hand controller computes
the forces on the ngers due to the tendons, exure stiff-
nesses, and contacts. The effects of suction and drag are not
computed for the ngers as they are negligible compared to
the tendon and contact forces. At each computing cycle, the
simulation checks whether the center of mass of the object
is contained within a polygon formed by the joints of the
ngers as shown in Figure 9. This is a quick test of whether
the object has escaped or been grasped (as opposed to
waiting for the simulation to settle to equilibrium with every
run) and speeds up computation time. A simplied version
of the conguration-dependent mapping from tendon and
extension spring force to joint torque, as described in Section
III(A), is obtained by tting a second-order polynomial to the
kinematic relationships obtained for the given geometry.
A. Drag and suction computations
When a submerged object, such as a cylinder, moves with
a moderate speed (Reynolds number> 1000), the drag force
increases approximately with the square of velocity [23]:
F
d
=
1
2
v
2
C
d
A (6)
where is the uid density,v is the speed of object relative to
the uid, A is the cross-sectional area of the object towards
the ow and C
d
is the drag coefcient. At low speeds, the
drag is viscous:
F
d
=F
D
vh (7)
where F
D
is the non-dimensional drag. The coefcients C
d
and F
D
are obtained empirically as 0.47 and 37.33 [24].
When an object approaches a ngertip, it experiences an
additional force due to the suction mechanism described in
Section III-C. The details of the suction effect depend on
the geometry of the ngertip and object, and are complex.
However, a useful approximation can be obtained for the
case when the distance between the two surfaces is small as
compared to their radii of curvature. Flow is modeled as an
inlet pipe attached to one of two parallel plates (Fig. 10).
Conservation of ow implies that
v(r) =
Q
2r
(8)
Fig. 10: General (left) and simplied (right) 2D suction model.
6694
Fig. 11: Simulated grasp region with suction. (Region A: grasp without suction. Region B: grasp with suction, located 6mm below ngertip and with ow
rate about 3L/min , which is based on our current design. Region C: suction is located 10mm below ngertip, with ow rate about 3L/min. Region D:
10mm below ngertip, 6L/min.) Results are mirrored for visual interpretation of grasp region.
where Q is the ow rate, r is a radial distance from the
center of the orice, and  is the gap between the plates.
Assuming inviscid ow and neglecting gravitational effects,
Bernoulli's equation relates the pressure to the velocity:
P (r) =
Q
2

4r
2
(9)
where  is uid density. For overall suction force, assuming
the stagnation zone is approximately the size of the orice,
we integrate the pressure over the ngertip:
F
s
=
Q
2

4
2
(ln
W
2
 ln
d
2
) (10)
where W is the width of the ngertip, assumed less than or
equal to the object width, andd is the orice diameter. Since
water is viscous, the effective dimensions Q and  will be
somewhat reduced, however the trend thatF
s
increases with
Q
2
and drops off with 1=
2
remains, as conrmed in Fig.
14 in Section V-A. The at plate approximation is not valid
for very small objects, but empirically the suction force will
still tend to increase with Q and decrease as 1=
2
.
suction(flow
disturbance(flow
(acrylic
cylinder
gravity
tube
5 10 20 40
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
object(diameter((mm)
50L(failure(hand(velocity((m/s)
2.7L/min
3.1L/min
3.2L/min
((hand(
velocity
Fig. 12: Escape hand velocity for objects of various sizes (laminated acrylic
cylinders 24mm wide and with varying diameters). Small objects are shown
to be more susceptible to light suction at the ngertip.
B. Grasp Simulation with Suction
Simulations were run to determine the grasp region [25]
for a neutrally-buoyant cylindrical object with various suc-
tion parameters. As shown in Fig. 11, grasp regions with and
without suction were simulated based on empirical pump
ow rate for various suction locations on the nger. To
reduce the computation time, the nger was replaced with a
model having constant joint stiffnesses and tendon moment
arms that would produce a similar behavior (with larger
required tendon forces). Since the suction position and ow
rate of the current nger were chosen for small and slippery
objects, they do not signicantly improve the grasp region
for a large cylinder with a diameter of 48 mm. However,
by relocating the suction proximally a few millimeters, the
region of acquisition increases (region C and D in Fig. 11).
An interesting gap in the acquisition region is noted near
x = 12 mm, y = 0 mm in which object attraction due to
suction is not enough to prevent it from rolling out along the
nger, resulting in grasp failure. These results demonstrate
that changing the suction location and ow rate has the
potential to signicantly increase the acquisition region.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
Early experiments with the hand show that light suction is
effective for acquiring and pinching small, slippery objects
(see video submission). In addition, ngertip suction provides
the ability to secure objects with just one nger. To test the
strength of this effect and its dependence on object diameter,
the hand was accelerated to various constant velocities using
a robot arm to simulate an environmental disturbance ow
around the nger and object; hand velocity at the 50% grasp
failure rate was recorded. Figure 12 shows that small objects
are strongly affected by suction, and that this effect is roughly
proportional to ow rate. This result is expected because, as
seen in Fig. 11, with the currently implemented ngertip
suction, the grasp region for large objects is not increased.
A. Suction Model Verication
In order to verify the suction model described in Section
IV , we measured the suction force on an object over a range
6695
Fig. 13: Suction model testing setup.
Fig. 14: Suction force for changing. The simplied at plate model closely
approximates the empirical data using estimated values of W and Q (eq.
10). An empirical 1=
2
t to the data is used in grasp simulations.
of distances and compared this data with analytical and
simulation results. A schematic of the setup, shown in Fig.
13, consists of a PVC cylinder, 48 mm in diameter, rigidly
attached to an aluminum frame and suspended from a digital
scale (force measurement accuracy of 0.001 N) such that the
cylinder is fully submerged. The nger was oriented such
that the at face of the distal phalange was always parallel
to the cylinder's tangent plane at the point of contact ( = 0).
Suction was then applied to holes in the ngertip with a ow
rate of 3.0 L/minute. As was varied, the scale measured the
change in apparent weight of the frame-cylinder system upon
the application of suction (i.e., the suction force).
As shown in Fig. 14, both the simplied at plate model
and the tted model match the empirical data. Positioning
resolution of the robot arm (0.001 mm) and the exibility of
the nger and test setup may account for experimental error.
B. Object Acquisition Region Testing
The planar underwater grasp region for a neutrally-buoyant
plastic cylinder (48 mm diameter) was determined empiri-
cally. Figure 15 provides a schematic of the setup. The hand
was attached to an Adept robot arm, used to translate the
hand relative to the object. The object was positioned by
attaching two magnets on the object to two low-stiffness
ferromagnetic springs anchored to the bottom of a water-
lled tank. This suspension system was chosen to ensure
consistent object positioning while also limiting its effects
on the dynamics of grasping. Once the object and water
settled, a grasp attempt was made by actuating all four ngers
using individual motors at maximum velocity until stalled.
The magnets detached as the hand contacted the object.
Successful grasping was classied as four-ngered prismatic
grasping (as in Fig. 1 (inset)). Ejection was classied as
failure, and all other scenarios were disregarded.
Each location was tested three times. Figure 16 shows
grasping results as compared to the grasp region predicted
via simulation. There is clear agreement between empirical
results and the simulated grasp envelope. The width of
the experimental region is slightly larger than that of the
simulation, likely due to the simplied geometry of the
phalange models used in simulation.
VI. CONCLUSION
An underactuated hand is being developed for underwater
mobile manipulation that uses compliant exures, with a
variable tendon and spring geometry to achieve a com-
bination of pinch and wrap grasps without high tendon
forces. The addition of gentle suction at the ngertips greatly
improves the ability to acquire and grasp small and slippery
objects underwater. Furthermore, modifying the suction lo-
cation can improve the ability to acquire large objects.
A hand simulation that includes the effects of compliance,
friction, drag and suction has been useful in evaluating
different hand designs and establishing the region of object
acquisition for each. Experiments with acquiring and grasp-
ing objects underwater conrm expected trends concerning
the region of acquisition and the suction force.
VII. FUTURE WORK
The hand presented in this work is an initial prototype. The
next version will be constructed from more durable polymers
and will include tactile sensors and cast extension springs
attached to features molded into the ngers. Suction will be
integrated into the nger and, based on the simulation results
in Fig. 11, an additional suction region will be located a
few millimeters proximal to the current one. Future investi-
gations will include surveying underwater grasp robustness
through grasp trials with various objects, particularly as they
?
?
?
?
??????
Fig. 15: Schematic of grasping experimental setup. X and Y dene the
coordinates of the center of the palm relative to the apex of the cylinder.
6696
1?3
2?3
3?3
-10 -5 0 5 10
0
2
4
6
8
X HcmL
Y HcmL
Fig. 16: Bubble chart depicting degrees of successful grasping without suction at various positions of the hand relative to the object. Three grasping trials
were performed at each location tested. Larger circles indicate a greater number of successful trials. The red dotted line indicates the grasping envelope
determined via simulation (also without suction).
change weight, rigidness, and surface friction. To improve
the ability of our simulation to accurately model grasps of
complex shapes, we also seek a deeper understanding of
nger mechanics, including a more accurate model of three
dimensional joint stiffness under general loading conditions.
An interesting future extension is to explore bimanual
manipulation. It may be desirable for the left and right hands
of the robot to be somewhat different, for example optimizing
one for holding large objects securely and optimizing the
other for working with small tools and grasping small and
slippery objects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been supported by the KAUST Red Sea
Robotics Research Exploratorium. H. Stuart and B. Gardi-
neer are additionally supported by NSF graduate fellowships.
The assistance of Eduardo Moreno, Oussama Khatib, Torsten
Kroeger, and Philip Mullins is gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] A. M. Dollar and R. D. Howe, ?Joint coupling design of underactuated
hands for unstructured environments,? The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 30, pp. 1157?1169, June 2011.
[2] M. Catalano, G. Grioli, A. Serio, E. Farnioli, C. Piazza, and A. Bicchi,
?Adaptive Synergies for a Humanoid Robot Hand,? in IEEE-RAS
International Conference on Humanoid (In Press), (Osaka, Japan),
2012.
[3] F. Lotti, P. Tiezzi, G. Vassura, L. Biagiotti, G. Palli, and C. Melchiorri,
?Development of UB hand 3: Early results,? in 2005 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4488?4493, 2005.
[4] F. Ficuciello, G. Palli, and C. Melchiorri, ?Experimental evaluation
of Postural Synergies during Reach to Grasp with the UB Hand IV,?
Intelligent Robots and, pp. 1775?1780, 2011.
[5] D. M. Aukes, S. Kim, P. Garcia, A. Edsinger, and M. R. Cutkosky,
?Selectively compliant underactuated hand for mobile manipulation,?
in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pp. 2824?2829, IEEE, May 2012.
[6] L. U. Odhner, R. R. Ma, and A. M. Dollar, ?Open-Loop Precision
Grasping With Underactuated Hands Inspired by a Human Manip-
ulation Strategy,? IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and
Engineering, pp. 1?8, 2013.
[7] M. Ciocarlie and P. Allen, ?A constrained optimization framework
for compliant underactuated grasping,? Mechanical Sciences, vol. 2,
pp. 17?26, Feb. 2011.
[8] M. Carrozza, C. Suppo, F. Sebastiani, B. Massa, F. Vecchi, R. Laz-
zarini, M. Cutkosky, and P. Dario, ?The SPRING Hand: Development
of a Self-Adaptive Prosthesis for Restoring Natural Grasping,? Au-
tonomous Robots, vol. 16, pp. 125?141, Mar. 2004.
[9] D. M. Aukes, M. R. Cutkosky, S. Kim, J. Ulmen, P. Garcia, H. Stuart,
and A. Edsinger, ?Design and Testing of a Selectively Compliant
Underactuated Hand,? International Journal of Robotics Research(in
press), 2013.
[10] M. Cutkosky, ?On grasp choice, grasp models, and the design of
hands for manufacturing tasks,? IEEE Transactions on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 5, pp. 269?279, June 1989.
[11] I. M. Bullock, J. Z. Zheng, S. De La Rosa, C. Guertler, and A. M.
Dollar, ?Grasp Frequency and Usage in Daily Household and Machine
Shop Tasks,? IEEE Transactions on Haptics(preprint), 2013.
[12] L. Birglen, T. Lalibert« e, and C. Gosselin, Underactuated Robotic
Hands, vol. 40 of Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics. Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008.
[13] D. M. Aukes, B. Heyneman, V . Duchaine, and M. R. Cutkosky,
?Varying spring preloads to select grasp strategies in an adaptive hand,?
in 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, pp. 1373?1379, IEEE, Sept. 2011.
[14] Willow Garage, ?2G ?Velo? Gripper,? 2013.
[15] Robotiq, ?3-Finger Adaptive Robot Gripper,? 2013.
[16] L. U. Odhner and A. M. Dollar, ?The Smooth Curvature Model: An
Efcient Representation of Euler?Bernoulli Flexures as Robot Joints,?
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 28, pp. 761?772, Aug. 2012.
[17] L. Howell, Compliant mechanisms. Wiley-Interscience, 2001.
[18] M. C. de Jong, J. A. Sparenberg, and J. de Vries, ?Some aspects of the
hydrodynamics of suction feeding of sh,? Fluid Dynamics Research,
vol. 2, pp. 87?112, Oct. 1987.
[19] M. Muller, J. Osse, and J. Verhagen, ?A quantitative hydrodynamical
model of suction feeding in sh,? Journal of Theoretical Biology,
vol. 95, pp. 49?79, Mar. 1982.
[20] F. Tramacere, L. Beccai, E. Sinibaldi, C. Laschi, and B. Mazzolai, ?Ad-
hesion Mechanisms Inspired by Octopus Suckers,? Procedia Computer
Science, vol. 7, pp. 192?193, Jan. 2011.
[21] A. Dollar and R. Howe, ?A robust compliant grasper via shape de-
position manufacturing,? IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 154?161, 2006.
[22] E. Drumwright, ??Moby Rigid Body Simulator.?.?
[23] J. D. Anderson, Fundamentals of Aerodynamics, vol. 1984. 1991.
[24] M. Tachibana and Y . Iemoto, ?Steady ow around, and drag on a
circular cylinder moving at low speeds in a viscous liquid between
two parallel planes,? Fluid dynamics research, vol. 125, 1987.
[25] R. Balasubramanian and A. M. Dollar, ?A comparison of workspace
and force capabilities between classes of underactuated mechanisms,?
in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pp. 3489?3496, IEEE, May 2011.
6697
