Development of Small Size 3D LIDAR*
Katsumi Kimoto
1
, Norihiro Asada
1
, Toshihiro Mori
1
, Yoshitaka Hara
2
, Akihisa Ohya
2
, and Shin’ichi Yuta
3
Abstract—We have developed a new type of 3D LIDAR,
which is small, light weight and low cost. The size and weight
are important factors of the aimed sensor to use with wide
range of robot vehicles, helicopters and airplane, and small
vehicles. To achieve compact size and light weight construction
the sensor has single pair of laser transmitter and receiver, and
scanning motor on which a vibrating mirror is placed. The
mirror is driven by the resonant frequency current supplied
through contactless power supply unit. Experimental results of
the prototype shows that the sensor of comparable size and
weight with recent 2D sensors can obtain 3D range data of
8000 points in 20 Hz with 270 degree horizontal and 40 degree
vertical views both in indoor and outdoor.
I. INTRODUCTION
In past decade scanning laser range sensors have been
widely used as eyes of mobile robots in surface and in air.
Their wide rage application and popularity can be realized
by their reduced costs and compactness. Since total weight
of a helicopter or a small airplane is severely restricted, the
size and the weight are critical factors of the sensor.
However most of them have only 2D scanning ability.
As a next level challenge of a laser scanning sensor, 3D
type sensors have been developed. The ﬁrst attempts were
to rotate 2D sensor’s body with a new axis [1][2][3]. Those
sensors have to move the whole 2D sensor bodies around
motoraxes back and forth,and requirebig motorpower.The
roundly-swingingtype sensor [4] [5] reduced the motor load
and realized the high-rate scanning of the additional motor.
This type has still complex mechanical structure and the
sensor size can not be reduced. Some companies are selling
3D LIDARs of small size. HDL-32e of Velodyne Lidar Inc.
[6] has 32 lasers in 40 degree vertical view rotating 360
degrees. However this sensor is heavy and expensive. ECO
SCAN of Nippon Signal Company [7] has single MEMS
(Micro-Electro Mechanical Systems) mirrors to realize 3D
laser scanning. For the restriction of MEMS mirrors the
ECO SCAN has narrow horizontal ﬁeld of view ( 60 degree
horizontal and 50 degree vertical). DepthSense Cameras of
SoftkineticInc.[8]useslaserorLEDﬂashandCMOSdevice
and can capture 3D data in high frame rates up to 60 fps,
*This research is supported by Japanese state subsidies for projects
to promote the enhancement of manufacturing technology for small and
medium enterprises.
1
K. Kimoto, N. Asada, and T. Mori are with Hokuyo Automatic Cor-
poration, Osaka HU Building, 2-2-5 Tokiwamachi, Chuo-Ku, Osaka, 540-
0028 Japan e-mail: k-kimoto@hokuyo-aut.co.jp, n-asada@hokuyo-aut.jp, t-
mori@hokyo-aut.co.jp
2
A. Ohya, and Y. Hara are with University of Tsukuba, Japan e-mail:
ohya@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp, hara.y@roboken.esys.tsukuba.ac.jp
3
S. Yuta is with Shibaura Institute of Technology, Japan e-mail:
yuta@ieee.org
but they have also a narrow ﬁeld of view and limited use in
outdoors.
In this paper we propose a new type of 3D scanning
method which makes a laser range sensor small, light, and
low cost. The idea is to combine 2D sensor rotation and
single MEMS-like resonant mirror to keep simplicity of all
structure. A prototype has been developed with the size of
55 mm? 60 mm? 135 mm (width? depth? height) of
the sensor head (excluding circuit boards). The near market
design has a size of 87 mm? 118 mm? 85 mm (width?
depth? height) and the 700 g weight of the whole sensor
body.
InsectionIIwediscussaboutour3DLIDARstructure.We
explain about a resonant mirror we developed in section III
and its control method in section IV. In section V developed
prototypes based on the proposed structure are described. In
section VI experimental results measured by the prototype
are shown. Section VII is conclusions.
II. SMALL AND LIGHT WEIGHT 3D SCANNER
A. Horizontal Scanner and Resonant Mirror
Keeping simplicity and advantage of 2D scanning sensor
which can easily scan over 180 degree horizontal views, we
add a resonant mirror over the horizontal scanning motor as
shown in Fig. 1. The resonant mirror unit itself is very light
andsmall,sothatwedonotneedspecialmotorforhorizontal
scanning. We used contactless power supply unit to the
resonant mirror unit, so that no power cables prevent motor
rotation. Because the mirror vibrates around the resonance
frequency the supplied power to the resonant mirror unit is
small.Butstillthiscontactlesspowersupplysystemoccupied
the dominant weight of the sensor.
To obtain ﬁxed angular amplitude of a resonant mirror
the frequency of vibration cannot be chosen arbitrary and
determinedbyatmosphericcondition.Thehorizontalscanner
is to be controlled to synchronize with the resonant mirror
vertical scanning.
B. Resonant Mirror Unit
We have developed a resonant mirror unit for the 3D
LIDAR. The unit was developed by ourselves to suit the
sensor requirements such as size and resonant frequency.
The vertical ﬁeld of view is determined by the amplitude
of the mirror vibration, which depends on the magnitude
of driving current and its frequency. In addition, resonant
frequencycharacteristic changesby temperature.This means
the vibration of the mirror must be controlled according to
the changes of temperature.Because the resonant mirrorunit
is on the rotating axis, the detected mirror angle is hard to
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4620
Motor
Laser Locus
Mirror
Rotation
Motor Rotation
Resonant
Mirror
Transmitter
Reciever
Fig. 1. Head of 3D LIDAR
be signaled out from the mirror unit. We decided not to use
mirror angle detector of direct sensing, but to estimate the
vibrationamplitudeusingthe3Dsensingdataofacalibration
pattern placed on the back side of the sensor.
C. Laser Transmission and Reception
Thesensorhasapairoflasertransmitterandreceiverasan
ordinary 2D scanning sensor. This design makes the sensor
simple and compact. The laser transmitter is placed at the
back side of the sensor. Its circuit board is shown in the
right part of Fig. 1. The receiver is placed at the top. The
laser beam from the back side is reﬂected by a small mirror
towards the resonant mirror from the top side which locus is
shown by dotted line in Fig. 1. The 3D scanner reﬂects the
laser at the aimed direction. The laser beam goes back to the
sensor from the environment and is reﬂected at the resonant
mirror again towards the receiver at the top of the sensor as
shown with translucent thick beam in Fig. 1. The laser pulse
interval limits sensing resolution and is determined by class
1 laser safety standards.
D. Range Detection and Calculation
The sensor we developed uses time of ﬂight method to
calculate the range to an object for its ability of long dis-
tance sensing with reasonable implementation cost. For this
prototype we used the processing hardware of the same type
used in UTM-30LX 2D range sensor of Hokuyo Automatic
Corporation which can measure up to 30 m long in 30 mm
error.
III. RESONANT MIRROR
Detectable range of LIDAR is largely affected by size
of mirror which reﬂects received laser light. High speed
Galvano mirrors [9] are not suitable for our sensor because
of its big size and high power consumption. Small size and
light weight MEMS mirrors [10] are suitable to be rotated
on the motor, but does not have enough area size to obtain
necessary sensitivity of LIDAR. A mirrorhaving appropriate
size and weight for our sensor does not seem to be exist in
a market.
We have developed new type resonant mirror for 3D
laser range sensor scanner. The resonant mirror has the
gimbalstructurelikesiliconMEMSscanners.SiliconMEMS
scanners are suitable for laser beam scanning but their
mirrors for example 4 mm ? 4 mm are too small to
detect faint light. However, our resonant mirror has a large
surface of 12 mm ? 12 mm and large scanning optical
angle of 40 degrees with resonant frequency of 400 Hz. The
resonant mirror has dimension of 21.2 mm ? 26.0 mm ?
8.6 mm (width? depth? height), and a weight of 12g. The
most important advantage of the resonant mirror is that no
expensive production systems like silicon manufacturing are
required.We can producethis typeofmirrorat lowunitcost.
Fig. 2 shows the resonant mirror structure. Gold coated
glass mirror for Infra-Red laser beam and planer coil plate
fordrivingare supportedby stainless steel (SUS 304)torsion
bars. The movingparts,mirrorand coil, are sandwichedby a
pairofpermanentmagnets.Astheirtorsionbarsaredesigned
under fatigue limitation, they passed gigacycle fatigue test.
Driving of 400 Hz indicates 1.44 megacycle per hour or 12
gigacycle per year. We have now data of non-stop driving
for 2 years over.
Fig. 3 shows the principle of the resonant mirror driving.
Static magnetic ﬁeld and AC current applied to the planar
coil cause alternatingLorentzForce.LetI be currentdensity
induced on a planar coil plate, and B be magnetic ﬂux
density in a ﬁeld, then the Lorentz force is given by (1).
F = I?B (1)
Fig. 4 shows the frequency characteristics of the resonant
mirror. The resonant frequency of the mirror is given by as
follows.
2πf =
p
k/J (2)
where f is the resonant frequency, J is the moment of
inertia, and k is the spring constant of torsion bar.
The resonant mirror in Fig. 4 has a resonant frequency
of 388 Hz at 300 mAp-p. Plotted optical degree is twice
of mechanical angle of the mirror. We can design precisely
the resonant frequency from 380 Hz to 420 Hz on this size
of the resonant mirror using FEM (Finite Element Method)
software. Resonant frequency driving saves power: it needs
lessthan0.3W.Lowpowerconsumptionisalargeadvantage
of our resonant mirror.
4621
Fig. 2. Resonant mirror unit
Fig. 3. Principal of resonant mirror driving
Fig. 5 shows the characteristics of temperature response
of the resonant mirror. Three different samples of mirror
devices (numbered 8063, 8066, 8067 on the ﬁgure) are
used. Resonant frequency is inﬂuenced by temperature, and
changesabout6.4Hzintemperaturesfrom?20
?
Cto 50
?
C.
Therefore resonant mirror must be controlled to account for
resonant frequency changes by temperature.
The resonant mirror is arranged on the rotor of DC
motor for vertical scanning. We have adopted a contactless
power transfer technology using electromagnetic coupling
for wireless power supply to a device on the rotor. We
constructed the contactless transformer which has a primary
coil of 250 turns, a secondary coil of 250 turns and a gap
of 0.5 mm. Its gap causes large leakage inductance but we
achieved power transfer efﬁciency of 40 % at 400 Hz.
Fig. 6 shows the structure of contactless transformer. This
contactless transformer has the advantage of extremely long
life, because it has no contact points like a slip ring.
IV. RESONANT MIRROR CONTROL
Thecharacteristicof resonantmirrorshown in Fig.4 is af-
fectedby atmosphericparameterssuchas pressure,humidity,
and especially temperature. Once we calibrated the sensor,
we must control the mirror to obtain constant amplitude
of vibration. We achieve this control by changing vibration
Fig. 4. Frequency and vibration angle characteristic of the resonant mirror
Fig. 5. Temperature response of the resonant mirror
frequencyofthe mirror:when the vibrationfrequencymoves
far from the resonant frequency, for example, torward right
on the right slope in Fig. 4, the amplitude of the mirror will
be decreased, and vise versa. The problem is now how to
detect the amplitude change of the mirror.
A. Amplitude Detection of Resonant Mirror
While the laser is emitted to backside of the sensor
in horizontal scanning, the sensor cannot measure envi-
ronmental objects being blocked by its own body. Instead
the sensor measures a reference reﬂector inside the body.
The measured results of the reference reﬂector are used
for distance calculation or detection of laser failure in 2D
scanning sensors. In our 3D sensor we use these back side
Fig. 6. Structure of contactless transformer
4622
d
d
Locus of
laser spots
Center of
sinusoidal
scanning
T
black
zone
white
zone
A
T
t
1 t
2
t=0
Fig. 7. Locus of the reference stripe on the sensor back.
measurements as detector of the resonant mirror vibration.
We put a stripe pattern plate as the reference reﬂector
on the back of the sensor, so the locus of sensor scanning
crosses the black and white boundaryof the stripe and forms
sinusoidal curve (Fig. 7). The black zone is actually non-
reﬂexive material against laser wave length, and then the
detectedlaserstrengthsareverydifferentfromtheblackzone
to white zone.
We can estimate the time duration between the crossing
points of the locus by counting low strength points from the
reference reﬂector. The accuracy of this method depends on
the point interval.
B. Controlling Angular Amplitude of the Resonant Mirror
As shown in Fig. 7 let the amplitude of the sinusoidal
locus be A, the distance between the center of sinusoidal
curve and the boundary to the black zone be d, and the
period of resonant mirror vibration be T. In addition we
assume the time t is zero when the locus is crossing the
sinusoidal center, and let the times of crossing point of the
black and white boundary be t
1
and t
2
. We assume t
2
> t
1
,
then T
d
= t
2
?t
1
. From the triangular relation we deliver
following equations.
d = Asin(
2π
T
t
1
) (3)
t
2
=
T
2
?t
1
(4)
T
d
= t
2
?t
1
(5)
From (3), (4), (5), we deliver
d=Asin(2π(
1
4
?
T
d
2T
)) (6)
Using (6) we can calculate the change direction of A
from the change of T
d
while T has not been changed. The
parameter d does not have to be calibrated directly. We
Fig. 8. First prototype
measure T
d
and calculate which direction the amplitude A
moved, then control the mirror frequency to compensate the
moved direction of the amplitude.
The estimated accuracy of T
d
is about the point inter-
val time ??. Since ?? has a constant value (actually it
changes slightly), the accuracy of estimation of T
d
/T is
inverse proportional to T. However, in the case of higher
frequency of vibration, we can add up results in several
periods of vibration and taking average, the accuracy will
be proportional to the
√
T, then we obtain total accuracy to
inverse proportional to
√
T.
In Fig. 4 of the characteristic curve of frequency and
amplitude, the right side (higher frequency than the resonant
point) is more gently-sloped, so we use the vibration in the
higher frequency zone. Therefore we move the frequency
lower to increase the amplitude of the vibration, and higher
to reduce.
Changes in laser strength affects the threshold level to
distinguish black and white boundary, so long term stability
of mirror amplitude control is still under investigation.
V. PROTOTYPE
The ﬁrst prototype has been developed and used for
validation and evaluation. Fig. 8 is the sensor head of the
prototype.
The sensor speciﬁcation is as shown in Table I. The size
of the head is about 55 mm ? 60 mm ? 135 mm (width
4623
TABLE I
SPECIFICATION OF THE PROTOTYPE
Max. range 30 m
Laser Class 1 semiconductor laser
Receiver Avalanche photo diode
Horizontal scanning angle 240 degree
Vertical scanning angle 40 degree
Frame rate 1.6 to 20 fps (50 to 600 ms)
Weight 600 g
Accuracy ±14 mm ?=7.2 mm
( white Kent sheet)
±32 mm ?=16.6 mm
( 10% reﬂectivity black sheet)
Angular Resolution 0.48 degree (vertical max.)
(12 ﬁeld conﬁguration) 1.50 degree (horizontal max.)
? depth? height). The frequency of the resonant mirror is
around400Hz.Theresonantfrequenciesofeverymirrorunit
are slightly different because of the manufacturing accuracy.
Resonant mirrors of higher frequency are currently under
development for up to 2.5 kHz. Horizontal scanning rate is
about 20 Hz, so that the resonant mirror achieve 20 vertical
scans in a horizontal rotation in 50 ms. There are 260 laser
points in a single period of the resonant mirror, and laser
intervalis longerthan 9 ?s for laser safety regulations.Fixed
laser interval results at most 0.48 degree vertical angular
resolution.
The horizontal and vertical resolutions depend on the
combination of speeds of horizontal scanning motor and the
resonantmirror.In theﬁrst prototypethe resonantmirrorfre-
quency is relatively low, then we implemented phase shifted
multiple scan function by which the scanned locus will be
interlaced and returnto the starting pointagain aftermultiple
horizontal scans. We call single horizontal scan ‘ﬁeld’, and
multiple horizontal scans ‘frame’ just like interlaced camera
or television monitor image scanning. Frame rate is 20 Hz
with single ﬁeld in a frame,or 2 Hz with 10 ﬁeld in a frame.
The number of ﬁelds can be set arbitrary up to 12 while
measuring environment. Horizontal angular resolution is at
most 1.5 degree when the number of ﬁeld is set to 12.
The ﬁrst prototype showed the validity of 3D scanning
range sensing, and we developed a compact size second
prototype. The full body size is about 87 mm ? 118 mm
? 85 mm (width? depth? height) including all the circuit
boards (Fig. 9 ).
VI. MEASUREMENT RESULTS
In Figs. 10, 11, and 12 we show indoor and outdoor
experimentswith the ﬁrst prototypesensor. Measured results
are plotted as 3D graphics in ﬁgures and the color of each
point represents received laser strength. Red color shows
higher strength, and aqua blue color shows lower strength
as shown in a scale of Fig. 13. All the measurements are
done in 10 interlaced scanning except Fig. 10(a). Grid lines
in ﬁgures are 1m interval, and sensor position is marked
with white translucent circle. Fig. 10 shows measurement
results of a meeting room. In Fig 10(a) non-interlaced
Fig. 9. Second prototype sensor, which is at the center. UTM-30-LXsensor
and a smart phone (iPhone3) are placed on the left and right to compare
their sizes.
scanning locus on room walls can be seen. In ﬁgures of
10 interlaced measurement from the top (Fig. 10(b)) and
top right (Fig. 10(c)) we can see the shape of the room,
whiteboard at the top right and corridor at the bottom left.
A human body is measured in high strength colored in red
at the left side of the sensor.
Fig. 11 shows measurement results of a corridor. A meet-
ing room adjacent to the corridor can be observed at the top
right.
Fig. 12 shows experimental result in an outdoor environ-
ment. Several objects such as a car, a human, trees, and
a sign board can be seen. Strong reﬂections from the sign
board and the front of the car plotted in red color can be
observed.This outdoorresults show that stable long distance
3D measurement can be achieved with this prototype sensor.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
With combination of horizontal scanner and a resonant
mirror, a 3D LIDAR was built in compact size without
loosing outdoor measurement ability. Interlaced scanning
of relatively low frequency of the resonant mirror enabled
densepointmeasurementsofenvironmentwiththepenaltyof
slowerframerate.Arobotcanchooseappropriateinterlacing
parameter for rapid frame rate sensing or for precise point
measurement.
REFERENCES
[1] Oliver Wulf, and Bernardo Wagner: “Fast 3D Scanning Methods for
Laser Measurement Systems”, Proc. of 14th International Conference
on Control Systems and Computer Science (CSCS 14), pp. 312–317,
2003
[2] Ankit Desai, and Daniel Huber: “Objective Evaluation of Scanning
Ladar Conﬁgurations for Mobile Robots”, Proc. of IROS 2009, pp.
2182–2189, 2009
[3] Kazunori Ohno, Toyokazu Kawahara, and Satoshi Tadokoro: “Devel-
opment of 3D Laser Scanner for Measuring Uniform and Dense 3D
Shapes of Static Objects in Dynamic Environment”, Proc. of ROBIO
2008, pp. 2161–2167, 2009
4624
Sensor
(a)
(b)
Human
body
Whiteboard
Sensor
(c)
(d)
Fig. 10. Meeting room measurement: (a) is a view from top right with
a single ﬁeld scanning. (b) is a view from top, (c) from top right. Plotted
colors indicates laser strength. (d) is a picture of the room.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 11. Corridor measurement: (a) is a view from top, (b) from top right.
(c) is a picture of the corridor.
4625
Car
Human
Body
(a)
Car
Human
Body
(b)
(c)
Fig. 12. Measurement in outdoor environment: (a) is a view from top, (b)
from top right. (c) is a picture of the outdoor environment.
High Low
Fig. 13. Laser strength scale: color of plotted points in experimental results
represents received strength of laser.
[4] Tomoaki Yoshida, Kiyoshi Irie, Eiji Koyanagi, and Masahiro Tomono:
“A Sensor Platform for Outdoor Navigation Using Gyro-assisted
Odometry and Roundly-swinging 3D Laser Scanner”, Proc. of IROS
2010, pp. 1414-1420, 2010
[5] Mitsuhiro Matsumoto, Shin’ichi Yuta, 3D laser range sensor module
with roundly swinging mechanism forfast andwide view range image,
In Proc. of IEEE Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration
for Intelligent Systems (MFI), pp. 156–161, 2010
[6] Velodyne Lidar Inc. HDL-32E product web page
http://velodynelidar.com/lidar/hdlproducts/hdl32e.aspx
[7] Nippon Signal Corporation ECO SCAN product web page
http://www.signal.co.jp/vbc/mems e/
[8] Softkinetic Inc. DepthSense product web page
http://www.softkinetic.com/en-us/products/depthsensecameras.aspx
[9] Cambridge Technology web page http://camtech.com/
[10] Fraunhofer application web page
http://www.ipms.fraunhofer.de/de/applications/mems-scanners.html
4626
