  
? 
Abstract— Research focus on service robots that deals with 
applications related to healthcare, logistics, residential, 
search and rescue are gaining significant momentum in the 
recent years. Their social and economic relevance is more 
than evident. Yet, while much has been researched about 
“designing robots” focusing on sensing, actuation, mobility 
and control of service robots, little work has been done on 
“design for robots” that looks at designing preferred 
artefacts or environments for such robots. In this work, we 
propose a new philosophy of robot inclusive spaces, a cross 
disciplinary approach that brings together roboticians, 
architects and designers to solve numerous unsettled 
research problems in robotics community through design of 
inclusive interior spaces for robots where the latter live and 
operate. With a residential floor cleaning robot as a case 
study, we inductively derived a set of four design principles 
namely observability, accessibility, activity and safety that 
guides the realization of an inclusive space for these service 
robots. Also, the suggested principles are further defined, 
analysed and validated for their merits in this paper. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In the past, design of contemporary new spaces and 
devices such as lighting and furniture conventionally target 
the majority of well able-bodied healthy person until recently 
apposite design principles were introduced in response to a 
special group of people such as children, elderly and user 
groups with physical disabilities.  For example, Robinson et 
al. proposed guidelines for housing severely and profoundly 
retarded adults [1], Regnier discussed principles in housing 
for the elderly [2], Richards et al. showed a framework for 
the achievement of survivable system architecture [3],  Mäyrä 
and Vadén presented rules for proactive home environments 
[4],  Bergen, Bolton and Fridley identified elements to guide 
those practicing ecological engineering [5] and the Center for 
Universal Design promoted seven principles widely used in 
the design of products and environments to be usable by all 
people [6]–[7].  
 
*Research supported by SUTD-MIT International Design Centre. 
Mohan Rajesh Elara is with the Engineering Product Development Pillar, 
Singapore University of Technology and Design, 20 Dover Drive, 
Singapore 138682 (E-mail: rajeshelara@sutd.edu.sg) 
Nicolas Rojas is with the Department of Mechanical Engineering and 
Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT USA (Email: 
nicolas.rojas@yale.edu) 
Adrian Chua is with the School of Science and Technology, Singapore 
Institute of Management University, 461 Clementi road, Singapore 599491 
(Email: adrianchua001@unisim.edu.sg)  
 
 With an increasing drive for productivity and recent 
advent in ICT, an emerging category of service robots are 
expected to be an additional stakeholder in social spaces 
aiding humans in day to day activities. There are two 
arguments that substantiate this claim. Firstly at workplaces, 
most countries would face tremendous shortfall in the 
number of blue collared workers with people preferring to 
work on higher value jobs. Secondly within a home, most 
people would have lesser time to handle household chores 
that are often tiresome, and repetitive. Such service robots are 
expected to engage in psychological (relaxation, and 
motivation), physical (support for basic skills like mobility, 
housekeeping, eating, grooming among others), and social 
(stimulation of communication) activities with people. 
Pertinent example of modern success stories consist of 
BigDog, a robotic pack mule by Boston Dynamics; Kiva an 
automated material handling robot by Kiva Systems and the 
intelligently sharp autonomous robotic vacuum cleaner 
iRobot, Roomba which was designed, fabricated and tested to 
help user clean the house.  
 Designing a service robot capable of performing a 
plentiful of functions to acclimatize to the present world is 
still not yet possible. Service robotics research has been 
challenging and convoluted. Such robots must be able to 
work competently and safely along people in highly dynamic 
and unpredictable built environments in homes and public 
places (for example offices, hospitals and schools). Even 
with the most cutting-edge technology, artificial intelligence, 
sensing, actuation, mechanics and control, service robots are 
still far from the ideal robot that it able to function 
autonomously and interact openly with human being in 
realistic human-related environments.  
 The perceived assumption in technology has been to 
invent and create service robots, its component technologies 
with largely sophisticated algorithms so as to perform simple 
and multilevel complex skills that a human requires. Given 
the boundaries of service robots and its capabilities at present 
time, the most logical approach would be to examine ways at 
designing social spaces and optimizing its architectural 
characteristics that would allow such service robots to 
overcome their limitations and achieve tasks easily at low 
costs.  Some studies that have looked into how this has been 
done include work targeted adaptations to living spaces 
through the use of wall embedded RFID sensors [8], indoor 
GPS [9], and visual markers [10]–[11]. Even though such 
solution offers some answers, they often emphasize on 
overcoming a specific problem in an application context such 
as obstacles avoidance, navigation, manipulation and 
localization lacking a holistic approach. There is a clear 
absence of any work both in robotics and architectural 
communities that focuses on design methods, tools, best 
Design Principles for Robot Inclusive Spaces: A Case Study with 
Roomba* 
Mohan Rajesh Elara, Nicolas Rojas, Adrian Chua  
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5592
  
practices and principles to be used by roboticians, architects 
and designers in realizing robot-friendly residential spaces. 
To date, work in the robotic community has mainly 
focused on specifying key elements for design of better robot 
systems. For instance, Brugali et al. determined principles for 
system openness and flexibility as these are quality factors of 
a robotic system [12] and Krichmar [13], based on the eight 
methodologies for intelligent agents proposed by Pfeifer and 
Bongard [14], presented design elements for biologically 
inspired cognitive robotics. Kawamura et al. puts forward a 
design philosophy for service robots that emphasizes 
compromise and practicality in design [15]. Although Soroka 
et al. have identified some of these challenges [16], systemic 
design principles that aim for seamless integration of service 
robots and humans in everyday environments still have yet to 
be discussed.   
Our ongoing Robot Inclusive Spaces project, a novel 
design initiative puts forward a “design for robot” approach 
to complement the conventional “designing robot” strategy. 
Such an approach brings together roboticians, architects and 
designers in realizing friendlier spaces for robots where 
component systems of the robot such as sensors, actuators, 
mechanism etc as well as the component variables of the 
space such as lighting scheme, floor surface, furniture 
choices etc are both optimized. The role of service robots 
and the concept of designing robot inclusive space will be of 
significant importance for smart cities of the near future. 
However, research emphasising design of friendlier spaces 
with optimal flooring, wall structures, lighting schemes, 
furniture choices and placement, doors, windows, among 
others to fit service robots is still lacking. In this paper, we 
put forward and validate a set of design principles for robot 
inclusive spaces with a residential floor cleaning robot as a 
case study. The design principles are extracted by inductive 
analysis with the robot under test. The design principles 
presented in this paper can be applied for both planning new 
civil and architectural projects as well as for adapting 
existing spaces. This paper closes with a discussion of the 
proposed design principles and the future prospect of this 
research.  
II. DESIGN PRINCIPLES 
A. Case study 
Over the past decades, human beings have been using 
technology to help improve their lives. From computers to 
smart phones, the use of technology has become an integral 
part of human life. In the household environment, machines 
such as vacuum cleaners, washing machines and clothes 
dryer have become necessities in helping improve the 
standards of living. The use of service robots has been 
picking up in trend albeit slowly. These service robots can 
assist human beings in many ways including household 
chores. With the help of service robots, household chores can 
now be taken care of when they reach home. One such 
tedious, time consuming, and repetitive but essential job is 
that of cleaning in any household. To automate the job, there 
are many brands of cleaning robots that are available in the 
market such as Roomba, Neato XV-21, CleanMate QQ2-T 
Plus, Iclebo, and Samsung NaviBot SR8980 among other 
platforms. The deployment of robot platform will help to 
improve productivity within home, by relieving the humans 
of this time consuming and menial work allowing them to 
focus on other important familial tasks that improves quality 
of life. However, given the nature of the task and 
environment, the autonomous cleaning task for the entire 
residence is not a trivial task. Our case study in this paper 
involves iRobot Roomba, a popular floor cleaning robot. 
Since its launch in 2002, iRobot has sold over 7.5 million 
Roomba cleaning home robots so far and is currently selling 
in over 45 countries around the world and expanding [17]–
[18]. Fig. 1 presents Roomba robot in action during our 
feasibility study performed in a residential space. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Roomba robot in action during our feasibility study performed 
in a residential space 
 Roomba’s mobility system consists primarily of two 
motor-driven and tracked wheels. Roomba steers by 
alternating the power supplied to each wheel. A behaviour 
based strategy is adopted for control of Roomba that achieves 
automatic detection and avoidance of stairs and other drop-
offs, detection of dirtier areas, spending more time cleaning 
the particular area and automatically adjusting from carpet to 
hard floors. Some of the important components that allow 
Roomba to function include an infrared “cliff sensor”, an 
acoustic-based dirt sensor and a forward-looking infrared 
sensor in its bumper to detect obstacles. The cliff sensor 
constantly sends out infrared signals and if is obstructed by 
dust or debris, the infrared- sensor is weakened. This will 
allow the Roomba to detect obstacles such as stairs or ledges, 
which will not allow Roomba to manoeuvre over such places. 
The acoustic-based dirt sensors are located under the two 
main brushes and are able to detect hard and small particles 
like sand. The sensor will then steer the Roomba towards the 
area where there is a higher concentration of dirt. The 
forward looking sensors are located at the bumper to detect 
obstacles. It will then perform and repeat a sequential of 
actions such as sensing the obstacles in front and slowing it 
down when it is nearing obstacles to reduce the force of 
impact. In terms of hardware design, it has an improved filter 
to capture more dust and allergens, faster counter-rotating 
brushes that will allow more hair and debris to be picked up 
and removed, an anti-tangle technology that prevents the 
Roomba from getting stuck on cords, carpet fringe and 
tassels, and an improved side brush to allow Roomba to clean 
edges and corners. For software design, it has implemented a 
virtual wall where users can set the area that they do not want 
5593
  
the Roomba to access and the Roomba will automatically 
return to its self-charging Home Base to dock and recharge 
between cleaning.  
 Even though Roomba has been studied extensively over 
the last decade, but previous efforts focuses on the 
improvement of mechanical design [19], control algorithms 
[20], multi-robot co-operation [21], human robot interaction 
[22], and autonomy [23] with no attention on designing a 
friendly space for Roomba to operate and therefore to 
improve its performance.  
B. Principle Extraction 
Robot inclusive spaces and its design principles has not 
been studied in both architecture and robotics literature. The 
design principles are expected to be enablers in realizing 
optimal design parameters for the space including flooring, 
furniture, lighting, space geometry, and wall surfaces among 
others. We adopted an inductive reasoning that begins with 
specific observation and measures, keeping these 
observations and measures; we detect the patterns and 
regularities, formulate some tentative hypotheses and finally 
end up developing the conclusion or theories [24]. 
1) Inductive Process 
An inductive methodology presents a sound research 
approach
 
[25] wherein design principles are extracted from 
spatial constraints observed through experimental trials 
involving Roomba over a variety of spatial settings where the 
robot performance is a measure of the cleaned floor coverage 
area. Fig. 2 shows the inductive process adopted for our 
experiments.  
 
Figure 2.  Inductive Process Adopted for Deriving the Design Principles 
The experiments conducted for this work involved twelve 
scenarios with three different settings for varying flooring 
type, furniture choices and their arrangement and lighting 
schemes. A snapshot of the experimental scenarios is 
presented in Figure 3. The experimental floor area was 12 
square meter. In all the experimental cases, dirt mixture 
containing sesame seed, rice and hair was sprayed uniformly 
throughout the floor area before robot operation. The 
percentage cleaned floor coverage area was determined by 
capturing a photo of the complete floor area and by 
computing the ratio of cleaned pixel area after operation by 
Roomba and pixel area of the entire experimental space 
including segments of unclean areas. Key spatial constraints 
observed during our experiments includes, 
? Space geometry with square corners was inaccessible 
by Roomba for cleaning in all experimental cases 
given the circular morphology of the latter. The 
performance of the robot was found to be better in 
the case of space geometry with rounded corners.  
? Carpet material was observed to slow down 
Roomba’s mobility. The mobility was much 
smoother with wooden flooring.  
? Furniture with square/rectangular bases was found to 
have larger uncleaned area in the periphery of the 
furniture. The uncleaned area in the periphery of the 
furniture was the least in those with circular bases. 
? Dark coloured furniture, walls and other surfaces 
were less observable by Roomba often resulting in 
crashes into those cases as compared to light 
coloured surfaces.  
? Uneven surfaces even with rugs and carpets over 
1cm are inaccessible for Roomba. 
? Dark coloured flooring generates increased false 
alarms for cliff detection and therefore results in 
increased uncleaned coverage area. 
? Ambient sunlight affects the IR sensors and results in 
increased collision.  
? Increased cluttering of furniture and human mobility 
results in increased collision and uncleaned floor 
area. 
? Furniture with low vertical ceiling just right for 
Roomba to pass or if the ceiling funnels down at a 
narrow angle increases the probability of Roomba to 
get wedged. 
? Furniture arrangements with boundaries converging 
at narrow angle often results in Roomba being struck 
in that space 
? Electrical cords lying on the floor were unobservable 
and at times Roomba gets trapped by them. 
? Rooms with closed doors are inaccessible for 
Roomba. 
? Orientation and placement location of the furniture 
were found to affect the way Roomba cleans and the 
number of collision with the furniture.  
? Roomba had difficulty detecting artefacts with 
transparent or glass surfaces increasing collision in 
those circumstances.  
? Low cliffs were harder for Roomba to detect and 
avoid in most cases.  
 
 
5594
  
Roomba tested over a Cliff with the three flooring types (Tiles, Wood, 
Carpet) 
 
Roomba experiments involving uneven surface 
 
Roomba experiments involving inaccessible areas 
 
Roomba experiments involving accessible furniture 
 
Roomba experiments involving varied wall surfaces 
 
Roomba experiments involving electrical wirings and infrastructures 
Figure 3.  Snapshot of the experimental scenarios 
C. Principle Definition 
 With the observations made from the experiments, the 
spatial limitations that impacted robot performance were 
consolidated and refined to form a set of generic design 
guidelines. Further categorization of the design guidelines by 
their characteristics yielded four design principles namely 
observability, accessibility, activity and safety.  
 
1) Observability 
Senses are physiological capacities of organisms designed 
to perceive external stimuli. In animals, everything that is 
known about the world is due to their senses.  Such sensors 
have evolved along the time to help them to solve vital 
problems [26]. In humans, particularly, five senses are 
traditionally recognized by scientists: vision, hearing, touch, 
smell, and taste. Service robots are not so different to living 
systems; sensors in them also play a fundamental role for 
understanding the environment and making decisions. In 
general, robots are provided with different sensors based on 
the task at hand, with their own capabilities and limitations, 
to emulate at least one of those of humans. Hence, 
observability principle includes a set of general design 
guidelines to maximize visibility and perception for a robot 
navigating in a given landscape. Below are the design 
guidelines derived from spatial limitations observed during 
inductive trials with Roomba: 
? O.1: Maximize robot perception through the 
appropriate selection of colours, textures, font/pattern 
sizes and materials for wall and floor surfaces. 
? O.2: Use robot sensing capacities to design 
observable signage or zoning for major intersections, 
high human and obstacle density zones, dynamic 
obstacles areas, uneven terrain, and low visibility 
regions. 
? O.3: Maximize sensory signal strength and contrast 
as perceived by robots.  
? O.4: Put in place mechanisms that minimize 
environmental noises that would interfere with the 
robot’s sensors.  
2) Accessibility 
Accessible design normally refers to the design of places 
of public accommodation and commercial facilities that 
include the needs of humans with disabilities, that is, people 
with physical, mental, or environmental conditions that limit 
their performance [27]. The Americans with Disabilities Act 
of 1991 [28], that was revised by the US Department of 
Justice in 2010 [29], establishes several requirements that 
different spaces must fulfil in order to guarantee the 
integration of disabled people in all environments. In fact, 
specific technical requisites are discussed for elements and 
areas such as, to name a few, doors, drinking fountains and 
water coolers, toilet rooms, detectable warnings, and dressing 
and fitting rooms. Service robots, principally those that are 
mobile, suffer from accessibility related problems as in the 
case of disabled people when are deployed in a human 
environment. Hence, accessibility principle includes a set of 
general design guidelines to provide safe navigation, good 
connections and access. The scope of the accessibility 
principle would be limited to the environment access for the 
robot while ignoring any dynamic agents like humans or 
other moving agents. Any interaction between humans, other 
5595
  
dynamic agents and robots would be dealt in the activity 
principle. Below are the proposed guidelines:  
? Av.1: Ensure barrier free access without steps, 
thresholds, ramps or kerbs. Where changes in floor 
levels are unavoidable, the mechanism put in place 
should allow for effortless accessibility in robots. 
? Av.2: Place doors that allow appropriate space for 
the robot to manoeuvre and manipulate. 
? Ac.3: Design recessed spaces in selected areas for the 
robots to cease work when required. 
? Av.4: Install door opening and closing mechanisms 
that is easier to operate. 
? Av.5: Floor surface material should be non-slippery, 
non-reflective, level and even. 
3) Activity 
Residential houses as in our case study are characterized 
by the highly dynamic flow of people through the space. In 
such scenarios, it is critical to ensure smooth flow of people 
in order to avoid inconveniences. This fluctuation of people 
in transit moving from one room to another give rise to a 
complex dynamic crowded scenario that is more than a 
challenge for robotics researchers. In general, the service 
robots to be deployed are not only expected to flawlessly 
detect both the static as well as the dynamic set of people, 
and other objects but also update its map while planning its 
future activities based on the traffic information. Robotic 
researchers have been constantly improving the robotic 
hardware and software algorithms for better robot navigation 
[30], human robot interaction [31], obstacle avoidance [32], 
goal recognition [33] and path planning [34] within a given 
space. However, numerous challenges remain unsolved due 
to the complex and dynamic nature of the situation. Activity 
design involves optimization of traffic flow involving people, 
goods, and robots achieved through selection of best suitable 
mechanisms, their dimensions, and placing them 
appropriately. Below are the design guidelines derived:      
? Ac.1: Provide design features to aid robots in 
recognizing traffic intensity in various regions of the 
space. Strategies for defining such spaces and routes 
will use those listed in the observability principle. 
? Av.2: Ensure appropriate integration or segregation 
of accessible routes for robots and artifacts. 
? Av.3: Allow for sufficient width, and height for the 
pathway to accommodate the expected flow of 
human and robots in order to avoid accidents. 
? Ac.3: Reduce the human-robot interaction by 
scheduling the access to critical spaces.  
? Ac.4: Warn people about the presence of robots 
using appropriate signs.  
? Av.5: Any special landmarks/adaptations (like tactile 
surfaces) for other user groups should be segregated 
from navigating paths of robots to avoid conflict 
between user groups.  
4) Safety 
Government policies and international standards have 
normally associated robotics safety to the analysis of 
dangerous conditions that threaten human security when 
working with robots, principally in industrial environments 
[35]–[37]. We depart from this perspective by extending 
safety as a principle that ensures the protection of robots 
against environmental hazards that can cause, for example, 
fallings, loss of power autonomy, or other irreversible failure 
situations, and focuses on the prevention of human-robot and 
robot-robot collisions. In general, safety principle ensures 
that every human, robot and objects that use a shared space 
would be able to move and co-exist under least hazards or 
risks. Some of these objectives are partially handled by other 
design principles previously discussed, in particular, by the 
accessibility and activity principles. But, to complement such 
design criteria and cover the global goals of the safety 
principle, as it is here understood, the next guidelines are: 
? S.1: Use clearly recognizable signs on stairs and 
steps, or when the surface type or level changes, to 
prevent robot fallings. Such indications will follow 
the strategies indicated in the observability 
principles. 
? S.2: Provide self-charging spaces in selected areas to 
avoid disruptions caused by loss of power. 
? S.3: Keep outdoor and indoor areas free from 
obstacles or slippery elements. Provide indications 
for robot safety following the activity principles. 
? S.4: Supply level platforms at the end of ramps for 
allowing the robot to perform tasks (e.g. open or 
close doors that meet the accessibility principle) 
without rolling backwards. 
? S.5: Ensure sufficient protection for the pathway 
edges to avoid any falls. 
? S.6: Select appropriate height and width for 
wall/furniture projections to avoid obstruction of 
pathways. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION 
An office setting within a school was chosen to conduct 
the experimental validation of the proposed design principles 
in a real world scenario. The area of the office under study 
was 9 square meters. In the experiments performed, we 
compared the performance of Roomba in terms of percentage 
cleaned floor area for default arrangement of the room to an 
inclusive arrangement based on the proposed design 
principles. To achieve that, we removed all the furniture and 
other artifacts out of the room leaving it empty and then 
scattered a pre-prepared dust mixture randomly all over the 
floor. After which we moved in the furniture and other 
artifacts to their original locations within the room and 
deployed the robot for the cleaning mission. Once the robot 
finished operation, we removed the furniture and other 
artifacts again out of the room which clearly indicated the 
unclean areas. We captured bird’s view images of the 
emptied room using a camera mounted on the ceiling 
following which the images were used to compute the 
5596
  
percentage of area cleaned of the entire room area using 
image processing tools. The process was again repeated for a 
new spatial setting that follows the proposed design 
principles. Both the test cases involved a constant set of 
functional artifacts and furniture. In the latter case, spatial 
parameters including furniture choices and their layout 
arrangements, lighting scheme, electrical layouts, wall texture 
and color were adapted based on the design principles with 
the objective of improving robot performance. While making 
adaptions for an inclusive space for the robot, efforts were 
taken to ensure the interest of primary human stakeholder 
was given due considerations. A dust mixture comprising of 
sesame seeds, rice and hair was used in both the experimental 
scenarios that was scattered uniformly over the defined room 
area.  
Our experiments started with the computation of 
percentage cleaned area in default room setting where robot 
cleaned the uniformly scattered dust mixture with no changes 
being made to the spatial layout. Following which, we 
designed an inclusive setting for the same room using the 
four design principles proposed in this paper achieved 
through adaption of the spatial variables. In our experiments, 
we only considered three spatial variables for adaptation 
namely lighting, furniture and wall surfaces. Keeping a 
constant set of functional furniture, we choose the ones that 
have a height clearance that allow Roomba to access under it 
and replaced the rest with inclusive ones. Furniture were also 
arranged in a systematic way that does not block Roomba in 
accessing corners and to prevent Roomba from wedging in 
between corners and getting stuck in corner. All the furniture 
was of a lighter shade colors to have an advantage for 
Roomba’s sensors to detect, avoid and access more space for 
cleaning. Electrical cords were also arranged properly and 
placed in a round base box under the table desk. Simple 
block of decks of about 10 cm each were placed under the 
table desk to lift the desk table to an appropriate height that 
allow Roomba to clean under it. Chairs were placed with 
better accessible spaces around them to allow Roomba to 
maneuverer. Lighting scheme was altered to be more 
homogeneous at around 500 lux as verified with the lux 
meter. Transparent wall surfaces were covered with light 
colored wall papers. Any unevenness in the floor surfaces 
was corrected to minimize false alarms in cliff detection. 
Once realizing the adaptations, the robot was deployed for 
cleaning mission and percentage cleaned area was computed 
for the inclusive spatial setting. The experimental setting for 
default and inclusive scenarios are presented in Figure 4.  
Comparison of the results from the experiments clearly 
indicated that the latter resulted in improved robot’s 
cleaning performance. Roomba covered 92% of the 
complete room area in an inclusive setting as compared to 
71% in the default setting resulting in an improvement of 
21% for a robot friendlier spatial arrangement. One major 
contributor to the poor performance in default setting was 
the occurrence of false alarms linked to cliff detection 
wherein the robot left areas of the room unclean as it sensed 
an obstacle when there was not any. The false alarms were 
often contributed as a result of the color and texture of the 
floor and wall as well as the non-homogenous lighting 
scheme put in place for the default scenario. This result is 
significant given that the unclean area in the default setting 
would require additional human efforts to be cleaned even 
after a dedicated robot was deployed for automating the 
task. It is therefore evident that a robot inclusive spatial 
arrangement not only results in an improved robot 
performance but also minimizes time and efforts for human 
users.  Also, the number of collisions witnessed between the 
robot and other spatial artifacts including walls were much 
lesser in the inclusive setting as compared to the default 
setting. Such increased collision observed in default setting 
would lead to shorter life time of the bump sensors in the 
robots as well leading to frequent need for maintenance. 
Another key outcome from the experiment is that the 
Roomba robot took a lesser time of 21 minutes to clean the 
inclusive setting as compared to 33 minutes for the default 
setting. This was mainly contributed due to the easiness to 
access and manoeuvre between furniture in an inclusive 
space as compared to the default one. Such a reduction in 
time by 57% to complete mission contributes not only to 
improved effectiveness but also the power efficiency as the 
robot can operate for longer hours for the same charging 
cycle.     
 
 
Default Setting         Inclusive Setting 
Figure 4.  Experimental Cases  
IV. CONCLUSION 
Given the current limitations of service robots in 
performing reliable autonomous works in dynamic human 
environments, we suggest here a “design for robot” approach 
to complement the conventional “designing robot” approach 
with an objective of overcoming the multiple research 
challenges identified by roboticians. The approach suggests 
designing and adapting spaces and its component variables 
such as lighting, furniture, flooring and walls to be suitable 
for the deployment of robots, a perspective that departs from 
the usual approach of optimizing the components 
technologies such as perception, action, and cognition 
without any inclusive adaptations to the operating 
environments.  
In particular, we derived four exemplary design 
principles, namely, observability, accessibility, activity, and 
safety using an inductive research methodology that support 
the successful deployment of residential floor cleaning robot, 
the Roomba. Experiments conducted with the floor cleaning 
robot have clearly validated the efficacy of the proposed 
robot inclusive approach and design principles. The cleaning 
performance measured by the floor coverage was found to be 
5597
  
21% higher in an inclusive space as compared to a default 
arrangement while retaining the interest of the human 
stakeholders. This work is the first step towards our long-
term objective: to develop a handbook of design methods, 
principles and best practices for designing robot inclusive 
spaces to be used by roboticians, architects and designers. 
The design principles presented here are illustrative rather 
than exhaustive and have been developed based on a case 
study and framed within the service robotics literature. Future 
work will involve validation of these design principles in the 
field, their application to generic scenarios and 
exhaustiveness through experimental trials. Since the analysis 
of design principles herein presented reduces the robot 
intelligence to a single dimension, the robot’s hardware cost, 
further work should be carried out to extend the proposed 
directions to more complex performance indicators. 
Moreover, a simulator is being developed as a part of future 
work that automatically synthesis robot friendly interior 
scenes by assigning and optimizing the cost function that 
represents the design principles defined. 
REFERENCES 
1. J. W. Robinson et al., “Towards an architectural definition of 
normalization: design principles for housing severely and profoundly 
retard adults”, Sep 1984.  
2. V. Regnier, “Design principles and research issues in housing for the 
elderly,” in Proc. Life-Span Design for Residential Environment for 
An Ageing Population, Washington DC, 1993. 
3. M. G. Richards et al., “Design principles for survivable system 
architecture,” In 2007 1st Annual IEEE Syst. Conf., Honolulu, HI, 
2007, pp.1-9. 
4. F. Mäyrä and T. Vadén, “Ethics of living technology,” Environments, 
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 171-196, 2004. 
5. S. D. Bergen et al., “Design principles for ecological engineering,” 
Ecological Eng., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 201-210, 2001. 
6. B. R. Connell et al. (1997, Apr 1). The principles of universal design 
(2nd ed.) [Online]. Available: http://www.disabilitymonitor-
see.org/documents/dmi2_eng/annex2.pdf  
7. M. F. Story, “Maximizing usability: The principle of universal 
design,” Assistive Technology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 4-12, 1998. 
8. W. Gueaieb and M. S. Miah, “An intelligent mobile robot navigation 
technique using RFID technology,” IEEE Trans. Instrum Meas., vol. 
57, no. 9, pp. 1908-1917, Sep. 2008. 
9. Y. Hada and K. Takase, “Multiple mobile robot navigation using the 
indoor global positioning system (iGPS),” in Proc. 2001 IEEE/RJS 
Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2001, Maui, HI, pp. 1005-
1010. 
10. G. Beccari et al., “Vision-based line tracking and navigation in 
structured environments,” in Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Symp. 
Computational Intel. in Robotics and Automation, Monterey, CA, 
1997, pp. 406-411. 
11. R. E. Mohan, C. A. Acosta Calderon, C. Zhou, P. K. Yue, L. Hu, and 
B. Iniya. "An embedded vision system for soccer playing humanoid 
robot: Robo-Erectus Junior." In Int. Conf. Signal Processing, 
Communications and Networking (ISCSN). 2008. 
12. D. Brugali et al. (2010, Sep. 01). Best Practice in Robotics (BRICS) 
[Online]. Available: http://www.best-of-
robotics.org/pages/publications/BRICS_Deliverable_D7.1.pdf. 
13. J. L. Krichmar, “Design principles for biologically inspired cognitive 
robotics,” Biologically Inspired Cognitive Architectures, vol.  1, pp. 
73-81, Jul. 2012. 
14. R. Pfeifer and J. Bongard, How the body shapes the way we think: A 
new view of intelligence. Cambridge, MA: MIT press 2007. 
15. K. Kawamura et al., “Design philosophy for service robots,” Robotics 
and Autonomous Syst., vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 109-116, Jul. 1996. 
16. A. J. Soroka et al., “Challenges for service robots operating in non-
industrial environments,” in 10th IEEE Int. Conf. Ind. Informatics, 
2012, pp. 1152-1157. 
17. iRobot Corporation. (2013, July 10). Our History [Online]. Available: 
http://www.irobot.com/en/us/Company/About/Our_History.aspx 
18. iRobot Corporation. (2013, Jan. 15). Needham Growth Conference 
[Online]. Available: 
https://www.google.com.sg/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web
&cd=8&cad=rja&ved=0CF0QFjAH&url=http%3A%2F%2Fphx.corp
orate-
ir.net%2FExternal.File%3Fitem%3DUGFyZW50SUQ9NDkwMzc0fE
NoaWxkSUQ9NTI3MzY5fFR5cGU9MQ%3D%3D%26t%3D1&ei=F
AbwUc-
kEIzirAfv44HQCA&usg=AFQjCNHxUZzhrNII5bMQUdRBNh5Mv
Y2Bvg&sig2=ScXnGMg0iPiHq2c10gZENw 
19. J.-Y. Sung et al., “Pimp my Roomba: Designing for personalization” 
in Proc. SIGCHI Conf. Human Factors in Computing Syst., New 
York, 2009, pp. 193-196. 
20. P. Nattharith, “Fuzzy logic based control of mobile robot navigation: 
A case study on iRobot Roomba platform,” Scientific Research and 
Essays, vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 82-94, Jan. 2013. 
21. D. Wu and H. Su, “An improved probabilistic approach for 
collaborative multi-robot localization.” in 2008 IEEE Int. Conf. 
Robotics and Biominetics, Bangkok, 2009, pp. 1868-1875. 
22. P. Saulnier et al., “Using bio-electrical signals to influence the social 
behaviours of domesticated robots.” in Proc. 4th ACM/IEEE Int. Conf. 
Human Robot Interaction, New York, 2009, pp.263-264. 
23. P. Kamol et al., “RFID based object localization system using ceiling 
cameras with particle filter,” in Future Generation Commun. and 
Networking (FGCN 2007), Jeju, 2007, pp. 37-42. 
24. W. M. K. Trochim. (2006, Oct. 20). Research Methods Knowledge 
Base, Deduction & Induction [Online]. Available: 
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/dedind.php 
25. S. Vikramjit, S. M. Skiles, J. E. Krager, K. L. Wood, D. Jensen, and R. 
Sierakowski. “Innovations in design through transformation: A 
fundamental study of transformation principles,” Journal of 
Mechanical Design, Vol. 131, 2009. 
26. A. Y. Saab, Seeing, Hearing, and Smelling the World. New York: 
Infobase Publishing, 2009. 
27. Usability First. (2013, Jul. 10). Principles of Accessible and Universal 
Design [Online]. Available: http://www.usabilityfirst.com/about-
usability/accessibility/principles-of-accessible-and-universal-design/ 
28. US Department of Justice. (1991, Jul. 26). Americans with Disabilities 
Act: 1991 ADA standards for Accessible Design [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ada.gov/reg3a.html#Anchor-Appendix-52467 
29. US Department of Justice. (2010, Sep. 15). Americans with 
Disabilities Act: 2010 ADA standards for Accessible Design [Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ada.gov/regs2010/2010ADAStandards/2010ADAstandard
s.htm  
30. Y. Morales et al., “Autonomous robot navigation in outdoor cluttered 
pedestrian walkways,” J. Field Robotics, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 609-635, 
Aug. 2009. 
31. R. E. Mohan, W. S. Wijesoma, C. A. A. Calderon, C. Zhou, 
"Experimenting false alarm demand for human robot interactions in 
humanoid soccer robots" International Journal of Social Robotics, 
Vol. 1, No. 2, pages 171-180, 2009.  
32. W. H. Huang et al, “Visual navigation and obstacle avoidance using a 
steering potential function,” Robotics and Autonomous Syst., vol. 54, 
no. 4, pp. 288-299, Apr 2006. 
33. K. Welke et al., “Autonomous acquisition of visual multi-view object 
representations for object recognition on a humanoid robot,” in 2010 
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Anchorage, AK, 
2010, pp. 2012-2019. 
34. F. Valero et al., “Trajectory planning in workspaces with obstacles 
taking into account the dynamic robot behaviour,” Mechanism and 
Mach. Theory, vol. 41, no. 5, pp. 525-536, May 2006. 
35. Ministry of Business, Innovation, and Employment, New Zealand. 
(2013, Jun. 27). Robot safety [Online]. Available: 
http://www.mbie.govt.nz/what-we-do/mbie-case-studies/mbie-
commercialisation-partner-network-%20helps-make-award-winning-
robots-reality/  
5598
  
36. US Department of Labor, Occupational Safety and Health 
Administration, Office of Science and Technology Assessment. (1987, 
Sep. 21). Guidelines for robotics safety [Online]. Available: 
https://www.osha.gov/pls/oshaweb/owadisp.show_document?p_table
=DIRECTIVES&p_id=1703 
37. International Standards Organization (ISO). (2011, Jul. 1). ISO 10218-
1:2011 Robots and robotic devices - Safety requirements for industrial 
robots - Part 1: Robots (2nd ed.) [Online]. Available: 
http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail.htm?csnumber=51330 
 
5599
