Robotic Implant to Apply Tissue Traction Forces
in the Treatment of Esophageal Atresia
Dana D. Damian, Member, IEEE, Slava Arabagi, Assunta Fabozzo, M.D., Peter Ngo, M.D.,
Russell Jennings, M.D., Michael Manfredi, M.D., and Pierre E. Dupont, Fellow, IEEE
Abstract—This paper introduces robotic implants as a novel
class of medical robots in the context of treating esophageal
atresia. The robotic implant is designed to apply traction forces
tothetwodisconnectedesophagealsegmentstoinducesufﬁcient
growth so that the two ends can be joined together to form
a functioning esophagus. In contrast to the current manual
method of externally applying traction forces, the implant
offers the potential to avoid prolonged patient sedation and
to substantially reduce the number of X-rays required. A
prototypedesignispresentedalongwithevaluationexperiments
that demonstrate its capabilities to apply traction forces to ex
vivo esophageal tissues.
I. INTRODUCTION
Surgical robots have yielded beneﬁts in medicine by aug-
menting the surgeon’s physical capabilities while enabling
the integration of multi-modal imaging and sensory data [1].
The greatest potential impact is when the use of robotics
in comparison with manual surgery results in both reduced
invasiveness together with superior outcomes. Towards re-
ducing invasiveness, medical robots are being designed that
move inside the body without reliance on a rigid mechanical
connection outside the patient. Examples include tethered
mobile robots such as Heartlander that can perform localized
sensing, mapping and treatment over the entire surface of the
heart [2]. Another class of examples is the tethered intestinal
crawlers designed to increase the capabilities of colonoscopy
while simultaneously reducing its trauma [3] [4] [5]. In addi-
tion, tetherless unactuated smart pills incorporating wireless
cameras and other sensors have opened up new directions in
medical diagnostics [6] [7] [8] [9] [10].
A completely new category of medical robot that has
yet to be explored is that of robotic implants. This ﬁeld
characterizes robots that autonomously regulate biological
processes inside the body for long periods of time. The
beneﬁts of robotic implants are multiple: they remove the
necessity of repetitive surgical interventions, and consequent
infection risks and pain, while restoring degraded or missing
biological functionalities. While they may move through the
body, they may also reside in one location and employ their
degrees of freedom to interact with tissue structures. For
example, they could perform such tasks as adjusting ﬂow
rates through valves and organs or act to change the length
or compliance of tissues.
*This work was supported by Swiss National Science Foundation grant
PBZHP2 143344.
D.D. Damian, S. Arabagi, A. Fabozzo, P. Ngo, R. Jennings, M. Manfredi
andP.DupontarewithBostonChildren’sHospital,HarvardMedicalSchool,
Boston, U.S.A. dana.damian@childrens.harvard.edu
A B C
Esophageal
segments
Sutures
Robotic
implant
Fig. 1. Inducing tissue growth through traction forces. A. Long-gap
esophageal atresia. B. Current treatment uses sutures looped around ribs
and tied off outside back. C. Proposed robotic implant.
One example for which a robotic implant would be
extremely beneﬁcial is esophageal atresia (EA). This is a
congenital defect afﬂicting about 1000 babies per year in
the US, in which the ends (segments) of the esophagus
are not connected (see Fig. 1A). Other applications include
conditions where lengthening of tubular structures is desired,
such as the bowel and the vasculature [11]. If the gap
between the two ends is small, they can be surgically
connected. When the gap is 3cm or more, however, it is
not possible to stretch the tissue sufﬁciently to create a
connection. For these cases, known as long-gap esophageal
atresia(LGEA),thebestcurrentsolutionconsistsofapplying
traction forces to each end of the esophagus for 14 days in
average (Foker’s technique) [12] [13]. This causes each end
of the esophagus to grow (lengthen) in the direction of the
forces. When sufﬁcient lengthening is achieved, the two ends
are surgically connected. As shown in Fig. 1B, the traction
forces are currently applied using sutures that are looped
around the ribs and tied off outside the patient’s back. Every
day the sutures are manually tightened and X-ray imaging is
used about every other day to assess tissue lengthening and
to check for potential suture tear out.
While producing superior outcomes to alternative proce-
dures, the child is sedated and kept on a ventilator for the
duration of the treatment. Sedation is necessary to avoid
motion of the rib cage that occurs during arm movement
as it may lead to tearing out the traction sutures. It would
be extremely beneﬁcial to these patients if (1) multi-week
sedation could be avoided so as to eliminate any effect on
long-term neurocognitive development, (2) X-ray imaging
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 786
1 cm
Esophagus
 segment
Robotic
implant
Fig. 2. Positioning of robotic implant within the chest.
to verify progress could be reduced or eliminated, and (3)
the need for re-operation due to suture tear out could be
reduced. A robotic implant has the potential to resolve these
shortcomings. As depicted in Fig. 1C, such a device could
apply tension to both ends of the esophagus simultaneously.
Since sutures are no longer tensioned around ribs, the pa-
tient could avoid sedation. In addition, tissue lengthening
and force could be monitored and controlled using implant
sensors reducing the need for X-rays while also enabling
more precise control of traction forces.
The contribution of this paper is to propose, fabricate
and perform initial testing of a robotic implant for treating
LGEA. Section II describes alternate approaches to treating
LGEA. Section III presents design requirements and implant
design. Calibration and evaluation experiments appear in
Section IV and conclusions are given in the ﬁnal section.
II. RELATED WORK
The repair of LGEA is considered one of the most difﬁcult
surgical interventions in pediatrics. A number of surgical
procedures are being applied in order to restore the struc-
ture and functionality of the esophagus [14]. Some LGEA
treatments aim to complete the esophagus using a surrogate
tissue for the missing segment. Colonic, gastric and jejunal
graft interposition are among the most popular [15] [16].
However,thereisageneralagreementthatusingthepatient’s
own esophagus should lead to superior results compared to
any esophageal replacement [14].
The long gap between the two esophageal segments led
to the development of techniques that attempt to stretch the
segments and ﬁnally connect the two ends (anastomosis). A
widely used method of lengthening the esophageal segments
X
H
4 years
2 years
8 years
8 months
3 months
A
1 cm
B
    Age         X[mm]   H[mm]
3 months      10           50
8 months      15           55
2 years           30         100
4 years           35         105
8 years           40         140
C
Fig. 3. Available space for robotic implant shown on X-ray image of eight
year old patient. A. Front view. B. Lateral view. C. Clinical estimate of
volume available based on patient age.
is circular myotomy, which proposes the elongation of the
highly stretchy submucosal layer of the esophagus in order
to bring the segments together [17]. However, because this
layer is highly stretched, while the other layers are divided
and not included in the anastomosis, the method leads to
leaks and other complications at the myotomy sites.
A different LGEA technique uses a multistaged ex-
trathoracic elongation process of the esophagus seg-
ments [18] [19] [20]. This method involves making se-
quential skin incision sites to which the esophagus segment
is connected under tension, until its length is sufﬁcient to
perform anastomosis.
Lengthening the esophagus axially is an alternate vi-
able approach. This has been attempted using magnetic
forces, e.g., electromagnetic bougienage [21], hydraulically
controller magnetic forces [22]. Although axial traction is
mechanically advantageous in the LGEA, the magnets tend
to erode the esophagus internal tissue where they reside, due
to increasing attraction magnetic forces, leading to the risk
of magnet evasion into the body.
Foker’s technique, as described in the previous section,
has been used in numerous cases and relies on manual and
periodic application of traction forces on sutures loops that
are attached to the esophagus segments [12] [13] [23]. Over
the course of a couple of weeks, suture tension is adjusted
daily to induce lengthening of the esophageal segments
through two incision sites on the patient’s back. While a
successful technique for cases of varying complexity, the ap-
proach has several shortcomings as described earlier. These
include the need for multi-week sedation, frequent X-rays
to assess progress and the potential for the (typically) four
pledgeted suture loops to tear out of a segment necessitating
re-operation. Furthermore, the elongated tissue has a reduced
lumen size (stricture) potentially because of the “necking”
that occurs with the current suture attachment method. The
roboticimplantintroducedhereisbasedonFoker’stechnique
and its design is intended to address these shortcomings.
787
TABLE I
IMPLANT DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
Requirements Value Unit
Maximum force 4 N
Maximum gap size 45 mm
Targeted child age 2 years
III. ROBOTIC IMPLANT DESIGN
The concept for the robotic implant is depicted in Fig. 2.
In the proposed approach, a motorized implant will apply
equal and opposite forces to the two esophageal segments.
It will be positioned on the right side of the chest, away
from the heart and displace a small portion of the volume
normally ﬁlled by the right lung. In the anterior-posterior
direction, it will be positioned so as to avoid compression of
the main stem bronchus. To avoid the need for sedation, the
device will not be attached to the ribs, but instead will be
“ﬂoating”inthechest,supportedbytheesophagealsegments
and surrounding tissue.
These clinical considerations regarding implant position-
ing,aswellastheageofthechild,aredeterminingfactorsfor
the space available for the robotic implant. An estimation of
the available space is listed in Fig. 3C. Miniaturization is one
ofseveralchallengesinprototypedesign.Theapproachtaken
here was to develop a device sized for a two-year-old patient
and in future versions reduce its size for younger patients.
Furthermore, while it may be possible to create a wireless
implant in the future, it is assumed here that a cable will
exit the patient’s chest to supply power and communication
signals.
While the effect of force variation with time on tissue
lengthening is not known, the clinical evidence suggests that
the current approach of increasing force once a day and then
allowingthetissuetorelaxiseffective.Byincorporatingboth
force and position sensors in the implant, traction force can
be programmed to replicate current clinical practice while
also monitoring tissue lengthening. In this manner, X-ray
monitoring can be signiﬁcantly reduced.
Preliminary experiments to measure applied suture forces
indicate forces are in the range of 2-4N. For these cases, the
sutures were subjected to signiﬁcant friction because they
were pulled out of the body. These traction forces were
sufﬁcient to elongate the tissue about 5mm per day [24].
In the technique described in [22], the axial traction force
on the esophagus was 0:5N. Regarding the gap between the
twoesophagealsegments,atypicalgapsizeis45mm,though
it can also reach up to 100mm. Based on these consider-
ations, the force production and sensing speciﬁcations for
the implant were set at 5N while the travel and position
sensing distance was set to 45mm. The design speciﬁcations
are summarized in Table I.
The current method of suture attachment to esophageal
segments using pledgeted suture loops is illustrated in
Fig.4A [23].Theproposedalternativemethodofattachment
to the robotic implant appears in Fig. 4B. In the proposed
approach, the tissue is sutured to a rigid ring such that the
Traction force
Traction force
A B
Suture 
holes
Traction 
sutures
Esophagus
segment
Suture 
ring
Pledget
Esophagus
segment
Fig. 4. Suture attachment methods. A. Standard method using four
pledgeted suture loops. B. Proposed attachment method using ring to which
tissue is sutured.
traction force is distributed more uniformly to the tissue and,
furthermore, esophagus diameter is maintained with the goal
ofavoidingthe“necking”andstrictureinherentinthecurrent
approach.
A. Implant design
To replicate manual force application, the implant should
be capable of applying a desired force and then holding the
actuator position associated with that force until the next
adjustment time. The proposed robotic implant automates
the tissue lengthening process.
The non-continuous manual traction operation currently
performed on the esophagus requires an automatic mecha-
nism that can hold the position of the esophagus segment
for most of the time and actuate in short time bursts. This
suggests the use of a nonbackdrivable transmission which
was implemented using a rack and worm gear combination
as shown in Fig. 5. The worm gear is coupled to a DC motor
and mounted on an aluminum car sliding on a polymer rack
reinforced with an embedded steel rod. As shown, the length
of the rack is 6cm, but this can be adjusted for different
LGEA gaps.
The esophageal segments are sutured to the two rings
mounted on the rack and sliding car, which are brought
togetherasthewormmovesalongtherack.Distancebetween
the rings is measured using a linear potentiometer mounted
ontherack(Tekscan,Inc.)andringforceismeasuredusinga
sensor (Honeywell, Inc) mounted on a freely rotating hinge,
as shown in Fig. 5A,B. Because the implant will be loosely
sutured to the chest wall to support its weight, the effect of
the implant’s mass on the force sensor will be minimized.
B. Encapsulation
A compliant waterproof encapsulation was developed to
isolate the mechanical and electrical components of the
robotic implant from the surrounding tissue. The encapsu-
lation must have sufﬁcient rigidity to exclude surrounding
tissue and yet be sufﬁciently compliant to prevent tissue
788
Motor
Suture
rings
Linear
potentiometer
Force sensor
Slider
car
B
C A
Motor
Slider
car
Hinge
Force 
sensor
Rack
Worm 
gear
Suture
ring
Elastomeric
encapsulation
1 cm
Cap
Mounting
rings
Rod
Fig. 5. Robotic implant. A. CAD schematic. B. Implant without elastomeric sleeve. C. Encapsulated implant.
damage. To achieve these aims, the encapsulation structure
consistsofastiffinternalskeletonandasoftelastomersleeve
as shown in Fig. 5C.
The internal skeleton consists of three longitudinal steel
rods, two aluminum rings that act as elastomer membrane
ﬁxing anchors, and two polymer end caps to secure the ends
of the elastomer membrane. An outer compliant cylindrical
sealing sleeve (Ecoﬂex 00-30, Smooth-On, Inc.) covers the
entire robotic implant except for the two suture rings. The
sleeve is manufactured by ﬁrst curing a ﬂat 1:5mm thick
sheet on a ﬂat surface, and then wrapping it around a
30mm wide cylinder, while sealing the edges with identical
elastomer.
The resulting soft sleeve is ﬁxed to the two end caps of
the implant, as well as to the two mounting rings on the
slider car by means of a compression clamp, in order to
reduce risks of tear outs due to holes created by screws.
Furthermore, the two mounting rings serve to eliminate
any stresses on the elastomeric sleeve due to slider car
motion, in order to prevent any effect on the force sensor
measurements. The steel longitudinal rods are lubricated
before encapsulation to promote sliding of the sleeve during
actuation. The encapsulated implant is 100mm long with a
diameter of 30mm and a mass of 55g.
C. Controller design
The control task is to drive suture ring force to a speciﬁed
set point and then hold the corresponding position while
monitoring force and position over time. Thus, the motor
is activated only during force set point control and the
nonbackdrivability of the rack and gear transmission is used
to hold gap distance ﬁxed between actuation cycles. As
shown in Fig. 6, the controller was implemented using
a Baby Orangutan 328P Board (Pololu Corp.), equipped
with an Atmel microcontroller, a motor driver, and serial
communication capabilities. The board acquires data from
Atmega 
328P
Motor 
driver
Motor
Force 
sensor
Distance 
sensor
Serial
com.
PC
Main board
5V Power
supply
Amplifier
Outside body Inside body
Fig. 6. Controller schematic. The “Inside body” label designates the
electronics that are incorporated in the robotic implant, while the “Outside
body” label denotes the electronics that would currently reside outside the
body of the patient.
the linear potentiometer and force sensor at 200Hz and
transmits it to an external PC via USB. The force signal
is ampliﬁed and ﬁltered using a low pass ﬁlter with a cutoff
frequency of 22:7Hz. Force control was implemented, in
which the force reference control is set from the PC and
transmitted to the board through serial communication. An
overdamped proportional controller is used to avoid traction
force overshoot during set-point adjustment.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A sequence of experiments were performed to evaluate the
prototype implant. These involved calibrating the position
and force sensors as well as demonstrating that the desired
maximum traction force could be achieved. In addition, ex
vivo experiments were performed with porcine esophageal
tissue to evaluate the force controller. To simplify testing,
the robotic implant was suspended by its upper suture ring,
as shown in Fig. 7, from stiff frame. Loads were applied to
789
Calibrated
weight
Robotic
implant
Fig. 7. Experimental setup for sensor calibration.
the implant through its lower suture ring. The conﬁguration
shown is for the sensor calibration experiments. For tissue
testing, the hanging weight was replaced with esophageal
tissue as described later in this section.
A. Distance sensor calibration
Distance sensor calibration experiments were conducted
on the encapsulated robotic implant. Three calibrated
weights, 100, 200, and 300g, were attached to the lower
suture ring as shown in Fig. 7. For each weight, the gap was
set at distances of 40, 30, 20, and 10mm, in descending
and ascending order, using a digital caliper. The output
of the distance sensor acquired by the microcontroller was
recorded.
Figure 8 depicts the sensor voltage with respect to
the gap size. Four trials per condition were recorded
(3 loads  4 gaps  2 directions 4 trials = 96 trials in
total). The average and standard deviation for each condition
were computed over ten seconds of measurement. Based
on this data, the gap between the suture rings is given by
G =  0:28V
G
+ 56:58, (R
2
= 0:99) with a precision of
0:04V/mm, where G denotes the gap and V
G
the voltage
from the distance sensor.
B. Force sensor calibration
While the force sensor is not affected by transmission
friction, the elastic force of the encapsulating sleeve may
inﬂuence the transduced traction force. To produce a cali-
bration curve, the experimental setup shown in Fig. 7 was
used with ring gaps set at 40, 20, and 0mm using a digital
caliper. At each gap, calibrated weights were applied ranging
from 100 to 500g with a discretization step of 100g. The
loads were attached to the lower suture ring in ascending and
descendingorder.Foreachexperimentalcondition,fourtrials
10 20 30 40
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Gap [mm]
Voltage [V]
1N load, desc. gap
1N load, asc. gap
2N load, desc. gap
2N load, asc. gap
3N load, desc. gap
3N load, asc. gap
Fig. 8. Distance sensor calibration for the encapsulated robotic implant.
1 2 3 4 5
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Load [N]
Voltage [V]
Gap 40mm, ascending load
Gap 40mm, descending load
Gap 20mm, ascending load
Gap 20mm, descending load
Gap 0mm, ascending load
Gap 0mm, descending load
Fig. 9. Force sensor calibration for the encapsulated robotic implant.
were conducted (3 gaps  5 loads  2 directions 4 tri-
als = 120 trials in total). Each force signal was recorded
for 40 seconds, and an average and standard deviation were
computed over the last 20 seconds, when the signal was
stable.
An approximately linear dependency exists between the
load on the robotic implant’s ring and the signal transduced
by the incorporated force sensor, as shown in Fig. 9. The
calibration curve is given by F = 0:04V
F
  0:77 with a
precision of0:004V/g, where F denotes the force and V
F
represents the voltage output by the force sensor (R
2
=
0:98). Loads in the range of 1 to 5N are represented in a
range of 0:80 to 2:35V.
C. Ex Vivo Experiments
In these experiments, fresh porcine esophagus (45kg ani-
mal) was mounted to the implant as shown in Fig. 10. Two
tissue samples were used with lengths of 45 and 60mm. The
inner and outer diameters of the two esophagi tissues were 9
and14mm,respectively,whicharesimilarinsizetoanormal
human esophagus in a 3 months old patient (10-12mm when
distended). Prior to experiments, the esophagus was kept
in phosphate buffered saline (PBS) solution at 4
?
Celsius to
preservetissueproperties.Theesophagustissuewasmounted
on the bottom suture ring of the robotic implant as shown.
The tissue attachment was made using a horizontal running
suture (4-0 Prolene sutures (Ethicon, Inc)), as shown in
Fig. 10B. The lower end of the esophagus was ﬁxed to the
base of the testing platform through a modiﬁed eyebolt and
“U” stiches (Fig. 10C). The total load on the suture ring,
comprised of the tissue and the eyebolt was 18 and 21g.
790
A
C
B
Fig. 10. Experimental setup for ex vivo tissue testing. A. Tissue is sutured
to the lower ring of the robotic implant. B. Detail of tissue ﬁxation to suture
ring. C. Detail of ﬁxation to platform base.
0 1 2 3 4 5
28
30
32
34
36
38
40
42
Seconds [s]
Gap [mm]
0 1 2 3 4 5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Seconds [s]
Force [N]
9mm esophagus, 2.2N target 
9mm esophagus, 4N target
14mm esophagus, 2.2N target
14mm esophagus, 4N target
A
B
9mm esophagus, 2.2N target 
9mm esophagus, 4N target
14mm esophagus, 2.2N target
14mm esophagus, 4N target
Fig. 11. Robotic implant response to step changes in traction force to 2:2
and 4N applied to two lengths of esophageal tissues. A. Force response. B.
Displacement response.
The initial gap between the rings at the beginning of each
experimentaltrialwasapproximately40mm.Atthisposition,
the esophagi were set at a similar tension, maintaining their
natural length. Each tissue was preconditioned before each
trial by relaxing it for at least two minutes before exerting
traction force. The moisture of the tissue was maintained by
periodically wetting it with a fabric saturated with PBS.
For each experimental trial, the force controller was com-
manded to apply a traction force of either 2:2 or 4N. The
measured force and displacement versus time are shown in
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
3
4
Displacement [mm]
Force [N]
9mm esophagus, 2.2N target
9mm esophagus, 4N target
14mm esophagus, 2.2N target
14mm esophagus, 4N target
Fig. 12. Study of the tissue properties of two porcine animal esophagi.
Fig. 11. As desired, the robotic implant applies the targeted
traction force in an overdamped manner (Fig. 11A), by
decreasing the gap between the two rings (Fig. 11B). A
slight gradual drop of the traction force was recorded by
the force sensor suggesting that further tuning reﬁnement of
the controller may be needed. Initial and ﬁnal displacements
were veriﬁed with digital calipers. As can be expected the
longer tissue sample requires more stretching to achieve a
speciﬁed force.
Being equipped with both force and distance sensors,
the robotic implant can also be used to investigate tissue
properties, e.g., elasticity. To illustrate this, Fig. 12 plots the
data from the previous ﬁgure as force versus displacement.
These curves are comparable to the standard stress strain
curvespredictedforsofttissues[25]andalsosimilartothose
previously reported for ex vivo esophagus [26].
D. Energy demands
Themaximumcurrentdrawnbytheroboticimplantduring
anygivenmotor-oncyclewasobservedtobe0:2A.Consider-
ingthattheroboticimplantwillbeoperateddailyforupto30
days and at most one minute per day to adjust traction force,
the maximum cumulative power consumption is 100mAh.
This value places the implant in the range of commercial
polymer lithium ion batteries, suggesting the potential fur
future wireless versions.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The paper introduces a tissue-traction robotic implant
as a speciﬁc example of a new and unexplored class of
medical robots. The initial prototype, sized for 2 year old
patients, provides the necessary force production and control
as well as sensing capabilities. Current research involves
prototype size reduction to accommodate younger patients.
Additionally, reﬁnement of the implant design for in vivo
studies is underway, which includes biocompatible encapsu-
lation and extensive long-term controller tests. The studies
based on the robotic implant can address not only current
clinical shortcomings, but also provide the means to study
the effect of force history on both tissue lengthening and
tissue properties.
791
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Andrew Gosline and Christian Robles for their
assistance in the development of the experimental setup.
REFERENCES
[1] B.J. Nelson, I.K. Kaliakatsos, and J.J. Abbott. Microrobots for mini-
mally invasive medicine. Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,
12:55–85, 2010.
[2] N. Patronik, M. A. Zenati T. Ota, and C. Riviere. A miniature mobile
robot for navigation and positioning on the beating heart. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 25(5):1109–1124, 2009.
[3] T. Ota, N. Patronik, D. Schwartzman, C. Riviere, and M. A. Zenati.
Subxiphoid epicardial pacing lead implantation using a miniature
crawling robotic device. Journal of Surgical Research, 137(2):242–
243, 2007.
[4] M. E. Rentschler, S.M. Farritor, and K.D. Iagnemma. Mechanical
design of robotic in vivo wheeled mobility. Journal of Mechanical
Design, 129:1037–1045, 2007.
[5] P. Dario, M.C. Carroza, B. Lencioni, B. Magnani, D. Reynaerts, and
M.G. Trivella et al. A microrobot for colonoscopy. In Proceedings
IEEESeventhInternationalSymposiumonMicroMachineandHuman
Science, pages 223–228, 1996.
[6] F. Carpi and C. Pappone. Magnetic maneuvering of endoscopic
capsules by means of a robotic navigation system. IEEE Transactions
on Biomedical Engineering, 56:14821490, 2009.
[7] M. Quirini, R.J. Webster III, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario. Design of a
pill-sized 12-legged endoscopic capsule robot. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pages 1856 – 1862, 2007.
[8] X. Wang and M. Meng. A magnetic stereo actuation mechanism
for active capsule endoscope. In IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Magazine, pages 2811–2814, 2007.
[9] http://www.givenimaging.com.
[10] http://www.smartpillcorp.com.
[11] H.B. Kim, K. Vakili, B.P. Modi, M.A. Ferguson, A.P. Guillot, K.M.
Potanos, S.P. Prabhu, and S.J. Fishman. A novel treatment for the mi-
daortic syndrome. New England Journal of Medicine, 367(24):2361–
2362, 2012.
[12] J.E. Foker, B.C. Linden, E.M. Boyle, and C. Marquardt. Development
of a true primary repair for the full spectrum of esophageal atresia.
Annals of Surgery, 226:4:533–543, 1997.
[13] J.E. Foker, T.C. Kendall Krosch, K. Catton, F. Munro, and K.M.
Khan. Long-gap esophageal atresia treated by growth induction: the
biological potential and early follow-up results. Seminars in Pediatric
Surgery, 18:23–29, 2009.
[14] P.F. Martins Pinheiro, A.C. Sim oes e Silva, and R.M. Pereira. Current
knowledge on esophageal atresia. World Journal of Gastroenterology,
18(28):3662–3672, 2012.
[15] M.M. Stone, E.W. Fonkalsrud, G.H. Mahour, J.J. Weitzman, and
H.Takiff. Esophagealreplacementwithcoloninterpositioninchildren.
Annals of Surgery, 203(4):346–351, 1986.
[16] K.M.Bax. Jejunumforbridginglong-gapesophagealatresia. Seminars
in Pediatric Surgery, 18(1):34–39, 2009.
[17] A. Livaditis. Esophageal atresia: a method of over bridging large
segmental gaps. Z Kindershir, 13:298–306, 1973.
[18] K. Kimura, E. Nishijima, C. Tsugawa, D.L. Collins, E.L. Lazar,
S. Stylianos, A. Sandler, and R.T. Soper. Multistaged extrathoracic
esophageal elongation procedure for long gap esophageal atresia:
Experiencewith12patients. JournalofPediatricSurgery,36(11):1725
– 1727, 2001.
[19] S. Takamizawa, E. Nishijima, C. Tsugawa, T. Muraji, S. Satoh,
Y. Tatekawa, and K. Kimura. Multistaged esophageal elongation
technique for long gap esophageal atresia: experience with 7 cases
at a single institution. Journal of Pediatric Surgery, 40(5):781–784,
2005.
[20] N. Tamburri, P. Laje, M. Boglione, and M. Martinez-Ferro. Extratho-
racic esophageal elongation (kimura´ s technique): a feasible option for
the treatment of patients with complex esophageal atresia. Journal of
Pediatric Surgery, 44(12):2420–2425, 2009.
[21] W.H. Hendren and J.R.Hale. Electromagnetic bougienage to lengthen
esophageal segments in congenital esophageal atresia. The New
England Journal of Medicine, 293(9):428 – 432, 1975.
[22] A. Oehlerking, D.P. Mooney, D.L. Trumper, J.D. Meredith, I.C. Smith,
P.M. Nadeau, T. Gomez, and Z.A. Trimble. A hydraulically controlled
nonoperative magnetic treatment for long gap esophageal atresia. J.
Med. Devices, 5(2):027511, 2011.
[23] J.E. Foker, T.C. Kendall, K. Catton, and K.M. Khan. A ﬂexible ap-
proach to achieve a true primary repair for all infants with esophageal
atresia. Seminars in Pediatric Surgery, 14(1):8 – 15, 2005.
[24] M. Nagaya, J. Kato, N. Niimi, S. Tanaka, and K. Iio. Proposal of
a novel method to evaluate anastomotic tension in esophageal atresia
withadistaltracheoesophagealﬁstula. PediatricSurgeryInternational,
21(10):780–785, 2005.
[25] Y.C. Fung. Elasticity of soft tissues in simple elongation. American
Journal of Physiology, 213(6):1532–1544, 1967.
[26] D. Sanchez-Molina, J. Velazquez-Ameijide, C. Arregui-Dalmases,
V. Rodriguez, V. Quintana, M. Shaﬁeian, and J.R. Crandall. A
microcontinuum model for mechanical properties of esophageal tis-
sue: Experimental methodology and constitutive analysis. Annals of
Biomed Engineering, 42(1):62–72, 2014.
792
