  
 
Figure 1.   Overview of infant congenital esophageal atresia (ICEA) 
surgery with the smart surgical robot (SSR). 
? 
Abstract—Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is commonly 
used in pediatric operations. This method greatly benefits 
patients because of the reduced surgical trauma. To perform 
such surgery smoothly, doctors must be highly skilled. To reduce 
operating difficulties, a great deal of research on surgical 
systems have been carried out. However, in some cases, smaller 
workspaces limit the application of MIS. For example, the 
workspace of infant congenital esophageal atresia (ICEA) 
surgery is only around 30?30?30 mm. Until now, most ICEA 
surgeries have been manually performed with traditional 
instruments. This paper presents a smart surgical robot (SSR) 
for ICEA surgery. The robot is composed of two slave arms, each 
consisting of a positioning manipulator and a surgical tool 
manipulator. The positioning manipulator uses a selective 
compliance assembly robot arm (SCARA) and a screw-pair 
mechanism to achieve translational movement in 3D space, and 
the surgical tool manipulator uses a “double screw drive + 
universal joint” structure to allow an omni directional bending 
motion. During surgery, the surgeon first creates the workspace 
manually to explore the target esophagus. The SSR system is 
then applied to perform operation. The configuration of the SSR 
means it can perform tissue manipulation under endoscopic view 
in a small workspace. Experimental results show that the 
endoscopic view permits the SSR system to be operated 
intuitively and accurately in the target workspace. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) has become a common 
choice in pediatric operations [1]. It provides patients with 
beneficial results by taking advantage of reduced surgical 
incisions, lower risk of infection, and shorter hospital stays.  
However, compared with adult patients, the pediatric 
patient poses additional challenges, such as smaller operative 
fields and more delicate tissue. Therefore, use of the MIS 
system in pediatric surgery is still restrained by the 
 
This work was supported in part by Global COE (Centers of Excellence) 
program “Global Robot Academia”, from the Ministry of Education, Culture, 
Sports, Science and Technology of Japan, in part by Grant Scientific 
Research (A) (90198664), in part by a Waseda University Grant for Special 
Research Project (2009B-207). 
Q. Liu, B. Zhang, T. Noguchi, Y. Takahashi, Y. Nishio,  Y. Cao are with 
the Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Japan. 
S. Ieiri, K. Toyoda, M. Uemura, M. Tomikawa, M. Hashizume are with 
the Department of Advanced Medicine and Innovative Technology, Kyushu 
University Hospital, Japan. 
Y. Kobayashi, M.G. Fujie are with the Faculty of Science and 
Engineering, Waseda University, Japan. 
Correspondence to: Q. Liu, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, 
Waseda University, Japan. Fax: 081-3-5369-7330. E-mail address: 
quanquanliu@fuji.waseda.jp. 
requirement of instrument dexterity, miniaturization, and 
operability [2].  
Generally, surgical instruments approach the surgical site 
through the primary trocar during MIS [3]. For example,              
Rothenberg et al. reported the thoracoscopic repair of a 
tracheoesophageal fistula in a neonate by manually operating 
instruments through several holes [4], [5]. Zee et al. presented 
the thoracoscopic repair of esophageal atresia with distal 
fistula [6], [7]. The surgical platforms offered by Anubis (Karl 
Storz, Germany) and EndoSAMURAI (Olympus, Japan) use a 
multichannel sheath to guide flexible instruments and the 
endoscope. These instruments are manually operated via 
bimanual handles [8]. However, this method of operation 
requires doctors to have a high level of operating skill. 
Robotic assistant systems aim to reduce the complexity of 
operations and improve the operating precision. The da Vinci 
system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA) offers surgical 
manipulation through multiple keyholes [9]. This system is 
usually applied in abdominal surgery, but, when manipulation 
is required in a smaller workspace, it is very difficult to attain 
dexterous operation. 
Many studies have considered the development of robotic 
systems to enhance surgical operability. Single port surgery 
(SPS) is a current tread in MIS. Petroni et al. presented a 
robotic system for single port laparoscopic surgery, composed 
of two multi-DOF (degree of freedom) arms and a 
stereoscopic camera [10]. Kobayashi et al. developed a 
Development of a Smart Surgical Robot with Bended Forceps for 
Infant Congenital Esophageal Atresia Surgery 
Quanquan Liu, Yo Kobayashi, Bo Zhang, Takehiko Noguchi, Yu Takahashi, Yuya Nishio,  Yang Cao, 
Satoshi Ieiri, Kazutaka Toyoda, Munenori Uemura, Morimasa Tomikawa, Makoto Hashizume, 
Masakatsu G.Fujie, Fellow, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2430
  
 
Figure 2.   General case of congenital esophageal atresia (CEA). 
 
Figure 3.   Overview of the SSR. 
surgical robot for single port endoscopic surgery. This 
consists of two serpentine arms and a flexible endoscope, 
which is fixed on the sheath [11]. Yang et al. described a 
multitasking robotic platform with an articulated head and two 
flexible arms. The articulated head is a multichannel sheath, 
through which flexible instruments and an endoscope can be 
inserted and steered by a surgeon [12].  Xu et al. presented an 
insertable robotic effectors platform for single port access 
surgery [13]. This robot can raise its stereoscopic camera after 
being inserted through an incision port. These systems take 
advantage of dexterous manipulators to achieve good 
operability. However, they require space to extend their 
manipulator and vision mechanisms. Therefore, they are not 
directly applicable in pediatric surgery because of the limited 
workspace. 
To arrange the instruments and vision module at the 
surgical site, an artificial pneumoperitoneum is usually needed 
at the beginning of the MIS [14]-[16]. However, the cavity 
pressure caused by the pneumoperitoneum, increase the 
higher likelihood of injury to an infant’s fragile organs. 
In this paper, we present the design and construction of a 
smart surgical robot (SSR) that works in open surgery. It can 
be operated in small workspace by utilizing two dexterous 
arms. An overview of the robotic system is shown in Fig. 1. 
II. BRIEF INTRODUCTION TO INFANT CONGENITAL 
ESOPHAGEAL ATRESIA SURGERY 
A. Clinical Target 
Infant congenital esophageal atresia (ICEA) is a 
congenital medical condition (birth defect) that affects the 
alimentary tract. It occurs in approximately 1 in 4400 live 
births [17]-[18]. ICEA takes several different forms, often 
involving one or more fistulas connecting the trachea to the 
esophagus. In approximately 85% of cases, the esophagus 
ends in a blind-ended pouch, rather than connecting normally 
to the stomach. Saliva and food will accumulate in the upper 
pouch, as it cannot drain into the stomach. Without treatment, 
the infant will soon die due to malnutrition. Currently, the 
most immediate and effective treatment in the majority of 
ICEAs is a surgical repair to close the fistulas and reconnect 
the two ends of the esophagus to each other. However, there 
are several factors affecting the surgical procedure, such as the 
state of the patient’s health [19] and the size of the esophageal 
gap [20]. In this study, we consider the neonate to have been 
admitted to the neonatal intensive care center and fulfill the 
surgical conditions. Generally, neonates are suffering from the 
CEA symptoms shown in Fig. 2. The mean gap between the 
upper esophagus and the lower esophagus is typically about 
20mm [21], and the average chest measurement of the neonate 
is about 31 cm [22].  
B. Robotic Assistant System for ICEA Surgery 
The traditional operation in ICEA surgery includes several 
steps: exploration of operative field, stripping esophagus, 
ligation of tracheoesophageal fistula, and esophageal 
anastomosis. Compared with the thoracoscopic surgical 
method, open surgery with small incision can avoid the side 
effect of pneumoperitoneum. In our study, the surgeon 
manually explores the esophagus segments, then, performs 
esophagus anastomosis via robotic assistant system. 
The semi-prone position is recommended during ICEA 
surgery, with the right side elevated at 45° and the right arm 
placed over the head [23] (Fig.1). Because the mean gap 
between the separated esophagus is 20 mm and the chest 
measurement is 31 cm, arranging a surgical forceps to 
manipulate the esophagus, requires a 30?30 ?30 mm space to 
be created near the fourth intercostal of the right side. 
Our objective is to develop a compact, simple SSR for 
ICEA surgery. The proposed SSR is composed of two slave 
arms that approach the target esophagus through a 30?30 mm 
incision on the right side of the infant. Bended forceps located 
at the distal of the slave arm are designed to improve the 
operative intuitiveness.  
III. MECHATRONIC CONFIGURATION 
A.  System Overview 
Fig. 3 depicts an overview of the SSR. The SSR has 16 
actuators that drive its two slave arms. Each slave arm consists 
of: 1) a positioning manipulator (four DOFs); and, 2) a 
surgical tool manipulator (four DOFs). The positioning 
manipulator works in a coordinated manner to position the 
tool manipulator. The surgical tool manipulator is attached to 
the front of the positioning manipulator. The dual slave arms 
2431
  
 
Figure 4. Overview of the positioning manipulator. 
 
Figure 6.   Overview of the tool manipulator. 
 
Figure 7.   Forceps design. a, geometric dimensions of forceps; b, wrist 
design indicating major components; c, ideal suture posture. 
 
Figure 5.   Power transmission in the SCARA. a, configuration of timing 
belts;  b, principle of  independent link control. 
are used for surgical intervention. 
The geometric dimensions of the SSR are approximately 
300?200?250 mm. The tool manipulator has a diameter of       
8 mm. Because the dual slave arms are analogous, only the 
mechanism of the left slave arm is presented. 
B.  Positioning Manipulator 
1) Objective: The positioning manipulator was designed to 
control the translational displacement of the tool manipulator. 
Fig. 4 shows an overview of the positioning manipulator. 
2) Required DOFs: Generally, three DOFs are required to 
determine a point in space. Redundant DOFs can be used to 
improve operative dexterity. The designed positioning 
manipulator includes four DOFs: vertical translational joint of 
the surgical tool manipulator (one DOF), horizontal 
translational joint of the surgical tool manipulator (three 
DOFs). One DOF of the horizontal translational joint is used 
to set the initial posture of the tool manipulator. 
3) Mechanism: The positioning manipulator consists of a 
SCARA (Selective Compliance Assembly Robot Arm) and a 
screw-pair mechanism. This can achieve three translational 
movements in 3D space. The tool manipulator is held at the 
distal of the SCARA mechanism, which is fixed on the screw 
nut (shown in Fig. 4). Because the SCARA mechanism and the 
tool manipulator are lightweight, they can easily achieve 
translational movement along the screw rotational axis. In the 
SCARA mechanism, timing belts are employed to transmit 
power from the base coordinate frame to the corresponding 
link, because the power transmission path of each link is 
independent (shown in Fig. 5), Therefore, link 1, link 2, or  
link 3 could maintain its original pose in the base coordinate 
system, even though other links have moved. This 
configuration means the positioning manipulator can be easily 
deployed to adjust the position of the tool manipulator. 
Flexible shafts are used for the power transmission elements, 
reducing the overall weight of the robot by separating the 
motor and end-effector, and simplifying the assembly process. 
C. Surgical Tool Manipulator 
1) Objective: The surgical tool manipulator is designed for 
tissue manipulation (Fig. 6). The tool manipulator acts as a 
surgical slave for surgical intervention. To realize this task, 
the tool manipulator presented here is equipped with a forceps 
as an end-effector. The mechanism of the tool manipulator is 
inspired by previous research in our laboratory [11]. 
2) Required DOFs: Generally, more DOFs can achieve 
higher dexterity. In addition, the tool manipulator should have 
sufficient rigidity for operation in the target organs. 
Considering the trade-off between dexterity and rigidity, the 
tool manipulator is designed to resemble a simplified human 
arm from elbow to finger. The designed tool manipulator 
comprises a two-DOF bending wrist, a one-DOF rotational 
elbow, and a forceps for the opening and closing motion of a 
hand. 
3) Mechanism: A “double screw drive (DSD) + universal 
joint” structure is used to realize the bending motion. The 
combination of a right-handed screw, a left-handed screw and 
a universal joint is called the “bending linkage”, and the 
2432
  
 
Figure 8.  Gripping force of the bended forceps. a, experimental setup of 
force detection; b, distribution of flexible shaft and motor in the 
experiment; c, gripping force with different bending angle. 
 
Figure 9. Control system frame. 
combination of two support rods and a universal joint is 
referred to the “base linkage”. Because two orthotropic DOFs 
are located on one universal joint, the forceps of the 
manipulator can achieve an omni directional bending motion.  
The forceps of the manipulator is shown in Fig. 7. This 
forceps design presents a big challenge for robotic 
mechanisms of this size. Key factors affecting the forceps 
performance include the rotational angle, actuation manner, 
and geometric dimension. As shown in Fig. 7, a geared 
mechanism is used to realize rotation, while a pull-push rod, 
passing through the central channel of the gear, is designed to 
open and close the forceps. 
In MIS, the angle between the suture line and the operation 
line should be in the range 15-60° [24], [25], as shown in 
Fig.7(c). Therefore, in our project, we select the bending 
angle of the tip to be 45°. User can achieve a good suture 
attitude even with the tool manipulator in its straight state. The 
length of bended forceps is 30 mm, which is consistent with 
the workspace for ICEA surgery. During surgery, only the 
bended forceps will be inserted into the body cavity. Because 
the thickness of the bended forceps is 3 mm, it can be flexibly 
operated on the target esophagus. 
Generally, surgical instruments hold a needle for suturing 
task. The typical needle driver force applied by EndoWrist 
(used in the da Vinci system) is about 13 N [26]. Our bended 
forceps uses a “flexible shaft + universal joint” system for 
power transmission. The flexible shaft has a diameter of 
1.4mm, and a length of 1.0 m, and is made up of several 
bunches of highly elastic twisted steel wires. A motor 
(EA-1754G-C040-10 SJP 1/6, rated torque 24 mNm, made by 
Chiba citizen precision Co., Ltd, Japan) is used to rotate the 
flexible shaft. Power is transmitted through the universal joint 
to the bended forceps. As shown in Fig. 8, the close movement 
of the forceps drives the housing unit to press a piezoelectric 
sensor, from which the gripping force can be calculated. The 
bending angle of the joint is designed to be ±45°. The gripping 
force for this and different bending angles is about 25 N. It can 
fulfill the requirement of the needle driver force. 
IV. CONTROL SYSTEM SCHEME 
The user controls the robot via a console located in the 
operating room (OR). The console consists of a monitor and 
user input. The monitor is used to display the video from the 
endoscope. The console provides a master-slave mode for 
controlling the slave robot. The user input to the slave 
manipulator is through a PHANTOM-Omni (SensAble 
Technologies Inc.). There are six DOFs to sense the stylus 
position and posture. The current prototype robot is controlled 
using a relative position system. The swing pivot of the 
bendable joint in the slave arm corresponds to the rotation 
center of the phantom’s gimbal, and the two bending DOFs of 
the gimbal are used to control the bending motions of the 
surgical tool manipulator. Based on the kinematics of the 
slave arm, the incremental position of the stylus is initially 
resolved in an inverted manner, and the computed resolution 
is sent to the corresponding actuator. Therefore, the slave arm 
moves with a velocity proportional to the user input 
movement of the phantom’s gimbal displacement.  
To facilitate the distribution of devices for clinical 
application, our system uses two PCs. One is located in the 
console, and processes the phantom data and kinematics 
calculations. The other, located beside the slave robot, 
processes the encoder data and sends out appropriate signals 
to actuate the motors required for the designed movements. 
The PC in the console runs a C/C++ program in a Windows 
environment, and the slave side PC uses QNX software (QNX 
Software Systems, Ottawa, Ontario) for real-time processing. 
The PCs communicate by the UDP protocol through the 
Ethernet. The architecture of the control system is shown in 
Fig. 9. 
V. EXPERIMENTS 
A. Objectives  
We performed experiments to evaluate the performance of 
the SSR system. In the first experiment, the user operated the 
robot to transfer rings between different nails. This was 
intended to evaluate the operating intuitiveness and flexibility 
of the SSR. In the imitative experiment, the probability of 
clinical application was discussed. 
B. Intuitiveness and Flexibility Experiments 
In this session, the experimental platform consisted of the 
SSR system and a square phantom, as shown in Fig. 10. There 
are four nails located at the vertexes of the 30?30 mm square 
phantom. The task was to actuate the robot to transfer the rings 
between the nails. 
2433
  
 
Figure 10. Setup for the intuitiveness and flexibility experiments. 
 
Figure 11. Operating view of the slave arms. a, transfer the ring from 
point N4 to point N3 in trail2; b, transfer the ring from point N5 to N4 
in trail4; c, endoscopic view of (a); d, endoscopic view of (b). 
 
Figure 12. Average time taken by five novice operators to traverse 
four trails. 
Two initial ring locations were selected in this task, one 
horizontal placement and one vertical placement. The 
different initial locations corresponded to different postures of 
the robot distal. 
For the horizontal placement, the trajectories for 
transferring the ring were (left arm, trail1) N1->N2-> 
N3->N4->N1; (right arm, trial2) N4->N3->N2->N1->N4. For 
vertical placement, the trajectories were (left arm, trail3) 
N5->N1; (right arm, trail4) N5-> N4 (N5 is located in the 
center of the square phantom). 
Five users with no experience of using the robot were 
selected to complete these four trajectories. Each user had 10 
min to familiarize themselves with the operating 
characteristics of the robot system and the visual feedback 
from the endoscope before transferring the ring between the 
nails. Because both arms are analogous, only the transfer 
process of the right slave arm is shown in Fig. 11. The average 
time of three attempts by each user to finish the four trails is 
presented in Fig. 12. 
All five operators exhibited a similar trend in their 
performance of using the robot to complete these trails. The 
results show the robot can be easy to control. According to the 
visual feedback from the endoscope, the operators can easily 
manipulate the bended forceps. Comparing the average time 
to transfer the horizontal ring with that of transferring the 
vertical ring, trail3 and trail4 are more time-consuming for a 
single transfer from one nail to another. To a novice user, the 
2D visualization of the horizontal ring is more intuitive than 
that of the vertical ring in an endoscopic view. 
C. Surgical Scenarios Experiment 
An imitative surgical site is shown in Fig. 13. An 
esophagus model is located in a 30?30?30 mm cavity. Only 
the bended forceps is inserted into the cavity. Because the 
bended forceps is thin, the area of vision shielded by the 
surgical tool manipulator is small. This allows the user to 
operate the manipulator with good visual feedback 
The experiment using the robot consisted of two stages. 
In the first stage, the robot approached the target 
esophageal model, as the esophageal model lies in a 30 mm 
deep cavity (similar to the environment of ICEA surgery). 
Therefore, only the bended forceps of our robot should be 
inserted into the cavity. In this stage, the positioning 
manipulators of the robot were mainly manipulated to search 
the surgical site. 
In the second stage, a stitching procedure was carried out 
on the esophageal model. One gripper grabbed the model 
while the other held a needle for suturing. This coupled 
motion of the positioning manipulator and surgical tool 
manipulator can achieve a good attitude in the surgical 
scenarios, as shown in Fig.13 (c). 
This imitative experiment demonstrates that the bended 
forceps allow the user operate intuitively. The bended forceps 
enable easy tissue manipulation. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper has presented a SSR system for ICEA surgery. 
This robot system makes use of a bended forceps, which offers 
intuitive user operation. The prototype robot consists of two 
slave arms. Each slave arm is composed of a positioning 
manipulator and a surgical tool manipulator. SCARA and 
2434
  
screw-pair mechanism are used to achieve translational 
movement in the positioning manipulator. “DSD + universal 
joint” structure is used to obtain omni directional bending 
movement in the surgical tool manipulator. The SSR is 
lightweight and small. Furthermore, the flexible shaft used for 
power transmission simplifies the robot assembly. During 
surgery, the robot will be located above the infant’s chest. The 
bended forceps of the robot, the only part inserted into the 
pediatric body, can be deployed for tissue manipulation. 
The results of intuitiveness and flexibility experiments 
show that users can easily operate the robot for basic surgical 
intervention. The imitative surgical scenarios experiment 
demonstrates that the bended forceps offers intuitive 
operability to the user. Therefore, we can conclude that the 
SSR system is competent. 
In vivo experiments will be required to conclusively 
demonstrate these benefits and ensure that this design makes a 
positive contribution to real ICEA surgery. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors sincerely thank the help of the subjects for 
participating in our experiments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Chandra, S. Dutta, CT. Albanese, “Surgical robotics and image 
guided therapy in pediatric surgery: Emerging and converging minimal 
access technologies”, Seminars in Pediatric Surgery, vol.15, 2006, 
pp.267-275. 
[2]  A. Lorincz, S.E. Langenburg, C. G. Knight, K. Gidell, R. Rabah, and 
M. D. Klein, “Robotically Assisted Esophago-Esophagostomy in 
Newborn pig”, J of Pediatric Surgery, vol. 39, 2004, pp 1386-1389. 
[3] C.F. La. Chapelle, W. A, Bemelman, B. M.P. Rademaker, T. A. Van 
Barneveld, F.W. Jansen, “A multidisciplinary evidence-based 
guildeline for minimally invasive surgery”, Gynecol Surg, 2012, pp. 
271-282. 
[4] S.S. Rothenberg, “Thoracoscopic repair of a tracheoesophageal fistula 
in newborns”, Journal of Pediatr Surgery, vol.37, 2002, pp.869-872. 
[5] G.W. Holcomb, S.S. Rothenberg, K.M.A. Bax, M. MartinezFerro,  C.T. 
Albanese, D.J. Ostlie, D.C. van Der Zee, C.K. Yeung, “Thoracoscopic 
repair of esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula- a 
multi-institutional analysis”,Ann. of Surg.,  2005, pp. 422-430. 
[6] k.M.A. Bax, D.C. Van der Zee, “feasibility of thoracoscopic repair of 
esophageal atresia with distal fistula”, Journal of Pediatr Surgery, 
vol.37, 2002, pp.192-196. 
[7] D.C. Van der Zee, K.M.A. Bax, “thoracoscopic repair of esophageal 
atresia with distal fistula”, Surg Endosc, vol.17, 2003, pp.1065-1067. 
[8] S. Horgan, K. Thompson, M Talamini, A. Feerers, G. Jacobsen, G. 
Spaun, J. Cullen, L. Swanstrom, “Clinical Experience with a 
Multifunctional, Flexible Surgery System for Endolumenal, Single-port 
and NOTES procedures.”, Surg Endosc,  vol.25, 2010, pp.586-592. 
[9] http://www.intuitivesurgical.com/. 
[10] M. Piccigallo, U. Scarfogliero, C. Quaglia, G. Petroni, P. Valdastri, A. 
Menciassi, P. Dario, “Design of a novel bimanual robotic system for 
single port laparoscopy”, IEEE Trans Mechatronics, vol.15, 2010, 
pp.871-878. 
[11] Y. Kobayashi, Y. Tomono, Y. Sekiguchi, H. Watanabe, K. Toyada, K. 
Konishi, M. Tomikawa, S. Ieiri, K. Tanoue, M. Hashizume, and M.G. 
Fujie,”A surgical robot with vision field control for single port 
endoscopic surgery”, in The Int. J. Med. Robotics Compute. Assist . 
Surg, vol. 6, 2010, pp.454-464. 
[12] J.Z. Shang, C.J. Payne, J. Clark, D.P. Noonan, K.W. Kwok, A. Darzi 
and G.Z. Yang, “Design of a Multitasking Robotic Platform with 
Flexible Arms and Articulated Head for Minimally Invasive Surgery”, 
IEEE IROS, 2012, pp.1988-1993. 
[13] K. Xu, R. Goldman, J. Ding, P. Allen, D. Fowler, and N. Simaan. 
“System Design of an Insertable Robotic Effector Platform for Single 
Access (SPA) Surgery”, IEEE/RSJ IROS, 2009, pp.5546-5552. 
[14] R. Garry. “Towards evidence-based laparoscopic entry techniques: 
clinical problems and dilemmas” Gynaecol Endosc. Vol.8, 1999, 
pp.315-326. 
[15] F.W. Jansen, K. Kapiteyn, T. Trimbose-Kemper, J. Hermans, J.B. 
Trimbos. “Complications of laparoscopy: a prospective multicenter 
and observational of laparoscopy: a prospective multi-centre and 
observational study”. Br J Obstet Gynaecol, vol.104, 1997, 
pp.595-600. 
[16] G.A. Vilos, A.Ternamian, J. dempster, P.Y. laberge, “Laparoscopic 
entry: a review of techniques, technologies, and complications”, MAY 
JOGC MAI, 2007, pp.433-447. 
[17] D.C. Clark. "Esophageal atresia and tracheoesophageal fistula". Am 
Fam Physician, vol.59, 1999, pp. 910–6, 919–20. 
[18] S.M. Kunisaki, J.E. Foker. "Surgical advances in the fetus and neonate: 
esophageal atresia". Clinics in perinatology, vol. 39, 2012, pp. 
349-361. 
[19] G. Seitz, S.W. Warmann, J. Schaefer, C.F. Poets, J. Fuchs, “Primary 
repair of esophageal atresia in extremely low birth weight infants: a 
single-center experience and review of the literature”, Biol Neonate, 
vol.90, 2006, pp.247-251. 
[20] J. Castilloux, A.J. Noble, C. Faure, “Risk factors for short and long- 
term morbidity in children with esophageal atresia”, Journal of 
Pediatric, vol.156, 2010, pp.755-760. 
[21] J. Seo, D.Y. Kim, A.R. Kim, D.Y. Kim, S.C. Kim, I.K. Kim, K.S. Kim, 
C. H. Yoon, S.Y. Pi, “An 18-year experience of tracheoesophageal 
fistula and esophageal atresia”, Korean J. Pediatr,  vol.53, 2010, 
pp.705-710. 
[22] D.F. Huelke, “an overview of anatomical considerations of infants and 
children in the adult world of automobile safety design”, Annu Proc 
Assoc Adv Automot Med. vol.42, 1998, pp.93-113. 
[23] P.F. Pinheiro, A.C.S. e Silva, R.M. Pereira, “Current knowledge on 
esophageal atresia”, W J of Gastr, 2012, pp.3662-3672. 
[24] H. Makoto, “Fundamental Training for safe Endoscopic Surgery”, 
2005, pp.95-98. 
[25] http://www.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp/imt/training/ 
[26] P. Mucksavage, D.C. Kerbl, D.L. Pick, J.Y. Lee, E. M. McDougall, and 
M. K. Louie, “Differences in grip forces among various robotic 
instruments and da vinci surgical platforms”, Journal of endourology, 
vol. 25, 2011,  pp.523-528.
 
 
Figure 13.  The robot was deployed for stitching an esophagus 
phantom in a 30?30?30mm workspace. a, overview of configuration;                    
b, robot is approaching the target tissue; c, stitching applied. 
2435
