 
Ski-Type Self-Balance Biped Walking for Rough Terrain 
Hongfei Wang, Shimeng Li and Yuan F. Zheng 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 
The Ohio State University 
Columbus, OH 43210 USA 
Email:zheng@ece.osu.edu 
Taegoo Kim and Paul Oh 
Mechanical Engineering and Mechanics 
Drexel University 
Philadelphia, USA 
Email: paul.yu.oh@drexel.edu 
Abstract—This paper introduces a new approach for 
humanoid robot quasi-static walking for improving stability 
performance, which is called ski-type walking. By adding two 
canes held by hands, the supporting region and stability 
margin are enlarged in comparison with biped walking. We 
first study the mechanism of cane-assisted walking by human 
beings. Based on the study, we develop two ski-type gaits, 
Crawl_1 and Craw-2, respectively for the humanoid robot 
Hubo. The stability performance for the two configurations is 
compared, which leads to the adoption of the Crawl_2 gait.  
Furthermore the length of the canes is selected to support a 
feasible while stable Crawl_2 gait. Finally simulation and 
experiments are performed to verify the new ski-type gait. 
Keywords— ski-type gait, biped robot, rough terrain, 
Hubo, OpenRAVE. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In the past two decades, biped locomotion has been 
widely researched in the humanoid robot field. Although 
some of the well-known humanoid robots such as Hubo by 
KAIST [1-2], ASIMO by Honda [3-4], and Petman by 
Boston Dynamics [5], etc. have demonstrated reliable biped 
walking under some perturbations, most of the experiments 
were conducted on flat or modestly rugged terrains. In 
general, biped walking algorithms are still not perfectly 
suitable for humanoid robots to reliably walk on real rough 
terrains such as grass, sand, rocks, etc. Walking on rough 
terrains by humanoid robot has never been seriously 
addressed except some earlier works on biped climbing 
slopes [6] or stairs [7]. 
In this paper, we describe a new gait called ski-type gait.  
The idea comes from human beings in negotiating rough 
terrains. When people climb a mountain, they often use 
canes to help keep balance. The advantages of canes are 
threefold. First, canes are held by hands; therefore, robot 
hands can be flexible for either manipulation or locomotion 
without a permanent modification. Thus the advantages of 
using hands for accomplishing certain tasks are maintained. 
Secondly, with canes held by hands, biped locomotion can 
be turned into quadruped locomotion almost instantly. 
Quadruped gaits are much more stable than biped gaits even 
on flat floors. Let alone rough terrains. Also quadruped gaits 
are quasi-static locomotion, for which an accurate dynamic 
model of the system is not required. That is advantageous 
under the circumstances of model inaccuracy or sensor 
failure, which occur regularly to walking robots. To our 
surprise, we could not find any work dealing with 
cane-assisted locomotion for humanoid robots. Simply no 
publication exists for the proposed ski-type gaits in the 
published literature. 
We believe that our technical and design approaches for 
the so called “ski-typed gait”, allowing the robot to hold 
canes in hands, can solve the stability problem of humanoid 
robots walking on rough terrains, while maintaining the 
manipulating capability of the hands. That will bring 
significant impacts to the use of humanoid robots in different 
applications.  In this paper, we describe the ski-type gaits, 
which we started in our earlier work [8], but will be studied 
in more robust terms, and analyze how it improves the 
stability of a humanoid robot. As described in our previous 
paper [8], the humanoid robot we used in our study is Hubo 
designed and manufactured by KAIST in South Korea [1-2]. 
The current study is sponsored by DARPA for the DARPA 
Robotics Grand Challenge Program. 
The paper is organized as follows. A brief study of 
cane-assisted human walking is described in Section II. In 
Section III, the general design and the stability performance 
of two ski-type gaits are presented. In Section IV, strategies 
for determining the length of the cane to achieve feasible 
while stable ski-type gait is discussed. In Section V, 
experimental and simulation results are presented. Finally, 
our conclusions and future work are given in Section VI. 
II. CANE-ASSISTED WALKING FOR HUMAN 
Usually human being can perform biped walking very 
stably relying on strong muscles and accurate biological 
sensing feedback in the legs. When the legs suffer some 
injuries, it turns out to be difficult keeping balance using the 
two legs only. In order to overcome the difficulties caused by 
injuries, cane is invented to help people walk. Since 
humanoid robot is not stable executing biped locomotion   
in rough or uneven environments, it can be viewed as 
leg-injured human beings. Consequently, it is beneficial to 
look into cane-assisted walking by human beings for 
designing reliable cane-assisted gaits for humanoid robots.  
According to [9-10], the cane is usually held at the 
contralateral side of the injured leg. Here are some variables 
for specifying the gait.  
  
 and  
  
 are width and length of 
the foot pedal,  
     
 is the distance between the centers of 
the two foot pedals,  
        
 is the distance between the 
left cane and the center of the left foot pedal along the y-axis, 
and  
    
 is the step length. The variables are shown in    
Fig. 1. Some reasonable assumptions are made as follows: 
       
  
   
  
                                         
        
    
  
  
                               
        
        
  
     
  
  
         
4. Projection of the center of mass (COM) is at center of 
un-injured foot pedal (left foot in this case) at the initial 
posture. 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3452
 
Fig. 1  Top view of one-cane assisted walking showing variables 
 
The gait and supporting region when  
  
      is 
shown in Fig. 2 (a)-(h). Starting from the initial posture, the 
cane is the first to move forward, and the COM is within the 
left foot. Then the right leg moves forward by the same 
distance as the cane, while the COM moves forward in the 
supporting area formed by the left foot and the cane tip. Then 
the right foot swings forward by the step-length with the 
COM in the supporting polygon formed by the cane tip and 
right foot. After three steps of motion, it is back to initial 
posture. 
Fig. 2  Stability margin curve for one-cane assisted walking 
 
From the stability margin curve in Fig. 2 (lower right 
corner), the minimum stability margin is     
  
, which is 
greater than that of biped walking with the same walking 
parameters but without cane. One may notice a sudden 
change of the stability margin. That is due to the lifting and 
dropping of the cane tip bringing in instant change of the 
supporting area. So by introducing a cane to assist walking, 
the stability performance is improved. However, this 
cane-assisted walking is asymmetric with only one cane held 
at the uninjured side. For humanoid robot, we introduce two 
canes held in both hands for two reasons. First, the gait can 
be symmetric which will make the gait planning simpler. 
And secondly the robot can be more stable with two canes. 
The details of the gait development are described in the next 
session. 
 
III. DEVELOPING SKI-TYPE GAIT  
A. Why ski-type walking is better? 
For biped walking robot, only the two foot pedals form 
the contact area. For relatively flat surface, current humanoid 
robots perform well enough for stable walking. But 
humanoid robots are challenged when they are expected to 
perform really tough tasks like rough terrain walking. In this 
scenario, biped walking gaits may not be enough because 
two contacting foot pedals provide relatively small 
supporting area. When stepping on debris, the zero moment 
point (ZMP) may fall out of the supporting area, thus the 
robot lose balance. 
On the other hand, quadruped walking is much more 
stable than bipedal walking. Unfortunately performing 
quadruped walking on humanoid robot platform faces 
challenges as well. For instance, one has to bend forward or 
lie backward the body for hands touching the ground to 
perform quadruped walking. One problem is that arms are 
not strong or long enough to be used as legs for supporting. 
Furthermore the lengths of arm links are usually limited, so 
step-size range is limited by the singularity problem. Another 
challenge is that biped walking is more flexible and effective 
than quadruped walking, especially when the humanoid 
robot needs to perform manipulation tasks. So transitions 
between these two gaits are required if we periodically use 
quadruped walking for negotiating rough terrains. But 
transition consumes extra time and energy. Ski-type gait is 
developed to overcome the difficulties while respecting the 
limits of humanoid robot.  
B. Considerations 
Fig. 3  Ideas of ski-type walking. 
 
Fig. 3 shows the idea of ski-type walking. By holding 
two canes in the hands, the larger supporting area formed by 
two foot-pedals and two cane tips makes it more stable than 
biped walking. Compared with the bending forward or lying 
backward, the transition between biped and ski-type walking 
is more feasible and flexible by simply grasping the canes 
when the new gait is used. The canes can also be easily 
dropped when the hands need to perform manipulation tasks.   
In the procedure of designing the ski-type walking, we 
start from making the canes vertically touching the ground. 
This is for the robot to keep balance easier. Since the cane 
tips touching the ground are considered to be point-contact 
3453
model, if the cane is not vertical, there will be a tangential 
force along the surface of terrain. To keep balance, the 
ground needs to provide enough friction force to prevent the 
tips from slipping. This requires the surface to have certain 
friction coefficient. So by making canes vertical, we assume 
there is no sliding at cane tips throughout the gait. 
The second consideration is the COM position in the 
supporting polygon in the initial posture. When the robot is 
in the initial posture, the robot is a close-chain system thus 
the weight distribution has multiple solutions. The first 
consideration indicates that the canes are assumed to be 
vertically touching the ground, so the weight distribution 
depends on the reaction force at cane tips and the COM 
position. For humanoid robots, the arms usually have less 
power supply than legs. It is reasonable to put the COM near 
the feet rather than the cane tips. In this section, we assume 
the COM lies along the front edge of the foot pedals as shown 
in Fig. 4.  
Fig. 4  Variables to specify ski-type gait. 
 
The third assumption is about COM shift sequence 
throughout the ski-type gait. In traditional quadruped 
walking, there is no difference between arms and legs, and 
the COM moves forward whichever limb is swinging [11]. 
But in ski-type walking, the arms are supposed to bear less 
weight than legs. So the COM only shifts forward with the 
swinging legs. This pattern of COM shift is also valuable for 
rough terrain walking. Since there is no COM shifting during 
cane swing, the phase of cane motion can be used for 
detection the environment. 
The last assumption is no sway throughout the whole 
walking period. This is for better comparison of the stability 
performance of different gaits. 
C. Step sequence choice.  
With all the assumptions made in the previous section, 
another factor is the step sequence of the gait. Since ski-type 
gait is one kind of quadruped and quasi-static gait, one 
possible step sequence is like the creep/crawl gait. It is hand 
motion and leg motion of one side then the symmetric 
motion of the other side. However, there is another possible 
crawl/creep gait of sequence: right hand, left leg, left hand, 
right leg, etc. Here we call the two step sequence Crawl-1 
and Crawl-2, respectively. 
C.1 Variables to specify ski-type gait 
The variables for specifying ski-type gait is shown in Fig. 
4 and listed as follows: 
1.  
  
      width of the foot pedal. 
2.  
  
       length of the foot pedal. 
3.  
     
    length between the centers of the two foot 
pedals along the y-axis. 
4.  
        
  length between the centers of the left foot 
and the left cane along the y-axis. 
5.  
     
    length between two cane tips along the 
y-axis. 
6.  
   
     length between COM and cane tips along the 
x-axis at the initial posture. According to the previous 
assumption for COM,  
   
  
  
. 
7.  
 
        length between cane tips and the center of 
the foot pedal along the x-axis. 
8.  
    
      step length. 
 
C.2 Comparison of Crawl_1 and Crawl_2 
In this part, only one side of motion is shown because the 
gait is symmetric for both sides. And  
   
 stands for the 
minimum value of the stability margin. 
The parameters are chosen as follow:  
  
           
 
  
       
    
       
        
       
   
        
 
 
      
     
        
        
     . 
Fig. 5  Step sequence and stability margin of Crawl_1 
 
In Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, there is a jump in stability margin 
when switching end-effectors (canes and foot pedals) to 
swing. That is the result of a sudden change in the supporting 
polygon. Also the minimum stability margin occurs when a 
3454
cane is moving to the next position. In both Crawl_1 and 
Crawl_2, when the right cane is swinging, the stability 
margin is minimal. In Crawl_1, the x-position of the right 
foot is smaller than that of Crawl_2. So the supporting 
polygon results in smaller stability margin compared with 
Crawl_2.  
Fig. 6  Step sequence and stability margin of Crawl_2 
 
In conclusion, with the same walking parameters, the 
Crawl-2 step sequence results in larger  
   
 and thus 
provides better stability performance for the ski-type gait. 
This conclusion is different from the optimal step sequence 
in [11]. In [11], the arms are treated as legs and the 
contacting points are all treated as point-contacting. But 
humanoid robots usually have foot pedals and only cane tips 
can be viewed as point. So Crawl-2 is chosen to be the step 
sequence of ski-type walking.  
D. Different configurations for ski-type walking 
From Fig. 4, once the dimensions of the foot pedal are 
fixed, the remaining variables that will affect the stability of 
ski-type gaits are:  
    
,  
   
,  
 
,  
     
. In this part, the 
relationship between stability and each of the five variables 
is evaluated. If the variable is not considered a variable, the 
value is the same as that in the previous part.  
   
 is 
selected as the stability performance criterion. 
D.1 Relationship between  
   
 and  
    
 
The step size will directly change the supporting polygon 
of the triple supporting phase, so  
   
will change 
consequently. Fig. 7(a) shows the relationship between  
 
   
 and  
    
. The range of  
    
 is chosen to be 0 to 
0.60m, three times the length of the foot pedals. 
When  
    
 is relatively small,  
   
 is constant because 
the shape of the supporting polygon is determined by  
 
, 
 
     
 , especially where the  
   
 occurs. But when  
    
 is 
large enough, the cross edge of supporting area, which is the 
line between left cane and right foot in Fig. 6(d), will change 
like rotating clockwise. Consequently, COM is closer and 
closer to this edge. When  
    
 increases to 0.6m, COM lies 
on this cross line. Thus  
   
 becomes 0. 
From the discussion above, when  
    
 is too large, the 
stability performance becomes worse. On the other hand, 
with larger  
    
, both the supporting area and the walking 
speed can be increased. In practice,  
    
 should be chosen 
carefully based on the trade-offs to maximize the supporting 
area and traversing speed, and meet the stability criteria.  
 Fig. 7  Relationship between  
   
 and  
    
,  
   
,  
 
,  
  
  
 
 
D.2 Relationship between  
   
 and  
   
 
 
   
 reflects the COM position with respect to the 
supporting area. Since ski-type walking should be different 
from bipedal walking, in our scenario, COM should lies 
before the center of the foot pedals:  
   
      . As 
mentioned in the previous part, the arms of humanoid robot 
should bear less weight than legs. Although  
   
 only 
reflects the weight distribution to some extent instead of 
determining it directly, it is reasonable to make COM at rear 
part of the supporting area at the initial posture. We choose 
       
   
      .  
From Fig. 7(b), when COM moves from center to front 
edge of the foot pedal,  
   
 increases to a constant. In the 
ski-type gait, COM only shifts forward when leg is swinging. 
In Fig. 6(d), if  
   
 is smaller, COM will be closer to the 
edge between the left cane and the right foot. As a result, 
 
   
 decreases. 
On the other hand, if COM moves further over the front 
edge of the foot pedal,  
   
 decreases to zero at some 
 
   
. In Fig. 6(d), increase of  
   
 is better but in Fig. 
6(c) it will make COM out of the supporting area. In 
practice, it will be best to choose some  
   
 resulting in 
3455
the maximal  
   
. If the constant area exists, the best choice 
will be in the middle of it. Choosing  
   
 by this strategy 
can not only make sure  
   
 reach the maximum, but also 
allow a variation in  
   
 without changing  
   
. 
D.3 Relationship between  
   
 and  
 
 
   Similar to  
    
,  
 
 will also affect the shape of the 
supporting area directly. It is reasonable to assume that canes 
are stretching forward. So  
 
      . 
   In Fig. 7(c), when  
 
 increases within a range,  
 
   
 keeps unchanged. But further increase will result the 
drop of  
   
. The reason for the drop is similar to that in 
 
   
 and  
    
. However in practice,  
 
 cannot be 
arbitrarily large because of the link length constraints of 
robots. In most cases,  
 
 will not affect the stability 
performance too much. 
D.4 Relationship between  
   
 and  
     
 
  
     
 is the distance between two cane tips at the 
initial pose. Usually it should be larger than the value 
between the left edge of the left foot and the right edge of the 
right foot. So  
     
      .  
In Fig. 7(c),  
     
 starts from 0.30m, and  
   
 
increases to some constant value. In practice,   
     
 
should be chosen somewhere leading to the constant  
   
 
based on kinetic constraints of the system. 
In this section, it is obvious that the stability performance 
of ski-type walking is determined by several variables as 
 
    
,  
   
,  
 
,  
     
. In practice, the values of these 
variables are usually constrained by the kinetic model of the 
humanoid robot. Section IV is one practical example in the 
designing of the ski-type gait. 
 
IV. CANE LENGTH DESIGN 
In this section, we consider the cane length to optimize 
the performance of the ski-type gait.  
A. variables of ski-type gait 
Fig. 8 shows the side view of the Hubo stick model 
holding two canes. The dimensions are based on the real 
robot. The following parameters are used to specify a gait:  
1. Lean angle ( 
    
): the degree between torso and 
vertical axis. This can be used to tune the center of 
mass (COM) position with respect to the supporting 
area. This position affects the torque required for 
each joint. 
2. Ankle angle ( 
     
):  the angle between lower leg 
and vertical line. That parameter will affect the 
singularity of the legs significantly.  A small angle 
leads more likelihood of singularity planning the 
ski-type motion.   
3. Cane length ( 
    
): the effective cane length held in 
the hands. 
4. Lx: the distance between the cane tips and the foot 
pedals when no step is made. This parameter directly 
changes the shape of supporting area and thus affects 
the stability margin.  
5. Step size ( 
    
): the size of one step.  
 
Fig. 8  Variables for developing ski-type gait 
 
There is an assumption here: the hip joint is always above 
the ankle joint in the z direction. Since the lower leg and 
upper leg have the same length, we have  
    
   
     
  
This assumption is made out of the following considerations. 
For humanoid robots, arms are usually not as strong as legs.  
That is true to Hubo which has relative small power supply 
in arms. To respect the power limit of humanoid, the weight 
should be sustained mainly by the legs. By making  
 
    
   
     
, the position of COM within the supporting 
area is basically near the feet end, but still can be tuned by 
the variable of  
    
. So this assumption respects the power 
limits of humanoid robots and does not affect the flexibility 
of the ski-type gait. In the following two parts, the 
relationship between stability and  
    
,  
    
 is calculated 
respectively. And the step sequence is Crawl-2. 
B. Relationship between  
    
 and  
    
 range 
The joint limits for Hubo are set to be:  
(1) Ankle pitch:       
 
 -   
 
 
(2) Knee pitch:       
 
 -    
 
 
(3) Hip pitch:         
 
 -   
 
 
(4) Shoulder pitch:  -  
 
 -   
 
 
(5) Elbow pitch:       
 
 –   
 
. 
 
We set  
    
   
 
,           
   
     , and 
study the relationship between  
    
 and  
    
 with 
different  
     
 values:   
 
   
 
       
 
. The results are 
shown in Fig. 9. Based on the results in Fig. 9, we choose 
 
    
       out of the following considerations. First, as 
ankle degree changes, the height and the valid step size 
range change accordingly. The value 750mm can promise 
large step range for all scenarios. Secondly, we assume the 
cane touching the ground vertically. So 750mm is around 
the height of torso which is a reasonable value. In the next 
section, we use 750mm to be the cane length and added the 
3456
cane model in simulation for motion planning. And in 
experiment, the canes are exactly 750mm. 
Fig. 9  Variables for developing ski-type gait 
 
V. SIMULATION AND EXPERIMENTS 
Simulation is performed in OpenRAVE. The simulator 
OpenRAVE is developed by Rosen Diankov of CMU 
Robotics Institute. Based on OpenRAVE, Robert Ellenberg 
from Drexel University developed supplementary packages 
for simulation dealing with Hubo model. The simulation 
involves ODE physics engine for dynamics; therefore, the 
result is close to real-robot operation. Fig. 10 shows 
snapshots of simulation and the proposed ski-type gait is 
stable using the step sequence of Crawl_2. As described 
earlier Crawl_2 gait has better stability margin than Crawl_1.   
Succeeding in simulation, we further tested ski-type gaits 
on Hubo. The software used for controlling Hubo is 
Hubo-Ach [12-13], which is available in our laboratory. The 
experimental result is shown in Fig. 11 which also shows a 
stable walking using the Crawl-2 sequence. 
 
Fig. 10  Hubo ski-type walking on flat surface in OpenRAVE. 
 
Fig. 11  Hubo ski-type walking on grass 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
We have presented a new quadruped walking gait called 
ski-type gait for humanoid robots. By holding two canes in 
the hands, robot has larger supporting area than biped 
walking and has improved stability performance. Step 
sequences for the ski-type gaits have been studied and 
performances are compared. The result dictates the 
employment of the Crawl-2 gait. Furthermore, the effect of 
the cane length to the gait performance is also studied. From 
our simulation and experimental results, ski-type walking is 
proved smooth on flat floors and on grass. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported in part by the Defense 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) award 
#N65236-12-1- 1005 for the DARPA Robotics Challenge. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ill-Woo Park, Jung-Yup Kim, Jungho Lee, and Jun-Ho Oh, “Online 
free walking trajectory generation for biped humanoid robot (KHR-3 
(HUBO),” in Proc. the IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation, pp. 
1231-1236, May 2006. 
[2] Hubo Humanoid Robot, http://www.ros.org/wiki/Robots/HUBO. 
[3] K. Hirai, M. Hirose, Y. Haikawa and T. Takenaka, “The development 
of Honda humanoid robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and 
Automation , vol. 2, pp. 1321-1326, May 1998 
[4] Asimo - The World Most Advanced Humanoid Robot, 
http://asimo.honda.com. 
[5] Boston Dynamics, http://www.bostondynamics.com. 
[6] Y. F. Zheng and J. Shen, ”Gait Synthesis for the SD-2 biped robot to 
climb sloping surface,” IEEE Trans. Robotics and Automation, vol. 6, 
no. 1, pp. 86-96, Feb. 1990. 
[7] Jung-Yup Kim, Ill-Woo Park, and Jun-Ho Oh, “Realization of 
dynamic stair climbing for biped humanoid robot using force/torque 
sensors,” IEEE J. Intelligent and Robotic Systems, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 
389-423, Nov. 2009.  
[8] Y. F. Zheng et. al., “Humanoid robots walking on grass, sands and 
rocks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Technologies for Practical Robot 
Applications, pp. 136-141, 2013. 
[9] J. F. Lehmann and B. J. De Lateur. “Gait analysis: diagnosis and 
management,” Krusen’s Handbook of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Philadelphia, PA, 1990. 
[10] W. P. Blount, “Don’t throw away the cane,” J. Bone Joint Surg Am, 
vol. 28, pp. 695-703, 1956.  
[11] R. B. McGhee and A. A. Frank, ”On the stability properties of 
quadruped creeping gait,” Mathematical Boisciences, vol.3, no.2, 
pp.331-351, 1968. 
[12] D. Lofaro, “Unified algorithmic framework for high degree of 
freedom complex systems and humanoid robots,” Ph.D. dissertation, 
Dept. Elect. Eng., Drexel Univ., Philadelphia, PA, May 2013.  
[13] M. Grey et. al., ”Multi-Process Control Software for Humanoid 
Robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Technologies for Practical Robot 
Applications, pp. 177-182, 2013. 
 
3457
