A novel actuation technology for safe physical human-robot interactions
Laure Esteveny, Laurent Barb´ e, Bernard Bayle
ICube, Strasbourg University-CNRS, France
Email:flesteveny, laurent.barbe, bernard.bayleg@unistra.fr
Abstract— The design of intrinsically safe systems is an
important issue in the development of physical human-robot
interactions, in particular in the medical ﬁeld. In this paper,
we explore a new approach, motivated by a medical robotic
application framework. The system is statically balanced, in
any conﬁguration. Its actuation results from a controllable
modiﬁcation of the balancing. This notably limits the interaction
forces between the robot and its environment, but yet authorizes
important features like accurate positioning or tracking while in
contact, which are key characteristics for the application. In this
paper, the robotic device principle is introduced, together with
its original actuation, which is developed and experimentally
assessed for a one DOF system. Capabilities such as trajectory
tracking in the free space, reaction to unexpected collision
and tracking of a moving environment are reported. The
generalization to more DOF, as required to complete medical
tasks, is also discussed.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Background
Robotic manipulation devices interacting with users have
been considerably developing over the last two decades, in
order to help human operators perform complex tasks, carry
heavy loads, or improve their accuracy [1], [2]. Innovative
design methods have therefore been proposed to guarantee
users safety during such physical human-robot interactions
[3]–[5]. This problem is of course fundamental in medical
applications, where the protection of the patients and the staff
is a top priority concern [6].
To give a concrete illustration to the reader, we will
take the example of robotic assistance for percutaneous
procedures in interventional radiology [7], [8]. These image-
guided procedures consist in the positioning of needles or
needle shaped tools for diagnostic or therapeutic purpose.
Robotic assistance, which allows for instance automatic
registration, improved accuracy or remote manipulation, is a
very interesting opportunity to further develop these medical
techniques. However, the robotic design has to comply with
highly demanding constraints, specially in terms of safety.
While most of the earlier systems were based on robots
attached to the operation table [9], [10], it is now well
known that in this case the robot has to compensate for the
patient’s physiological motions [11], or the needle has to be
released when not inserted, in order to limit tissue laceration
or involuntary needle penetration. Additionally, these robots,
generally quite rigid, have a large workspace and collisions
(with the imaging device, with the staff) have to be taken
into account. Whereas patient-mounted systems [12] offer
an interesting solution for partial motion compensation, they
also suffer from drawbacks like e.g. limited workspace, base
attachment compliance, and difﬁcult access to the needle
because of their compactness.
The aforementioned requirements are quite general when
considering soft tissues interactions. Medical robotic devices
have to be safe for the medical staff who can possibly
interact with them but also to be safe with the patient. So
far, these safety issues have not always been considered as
a basic requirement but often as a demanding speciﬁcation,
limiting the device performances. Paradoxically, recent man-
robot safety improvements have not yet been applied to
design of medical devices, may be because they had been
developed with a more general objective of safe physical
human-robot interaction [2]. Two main methods are reported
in the literature in order to obtain intrinsically safe phys-
ical human-robot interactions. The ﬁrst one is focused on
actuation, and consists in controlling the joints stiffness or
damping by means of compliant actuators [4], [5]. Typically,
an actuator is used to control the joint position whereas a
second one is used to control the joint stiffness or damping,
according to safety or accuracy concerns. Nevertheless, this
approach leads to power-consuming systems and require
complex control strategies, mainly due to the use of several
actuators per joint. In order to limit the number of actuators,
a second method consists in the design of intrinsically safe
mechanisms [13], [14]. These systems are built with parts
having low masses and inertia, and their actuation torque is
mechanically limited. The main advantage of such systems
is that they give much more intrinsic guarantees than con-
ventional robots, whose safety mainly relies on interaction
control.
B. Purpose and contributions
An innovative actuation strategy focused on safety con-
cerns, which combines intrinsically safe design and indirect
actuation, is developed in this paper, and assessed experi-
mentally using a one degree of freedom (DOF) prototype.
This system is statically balanced to passively compensate
for the gravitational effects, thus limiting the inﬂuence of the
device mass and inertia during interactions. This also limits
actuation power, and then increases intrinsic system safety.
The originality of the proposed solution relies on the design
of the mechanism that indirectly actuates the system by
modifying its balancing so as to follow a planned trajectory
or to remain in contact with a moving environment, without
developing large forces.
Though realistic medical positioning tasks require at least
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5032
3 DOF, we ﬁrst present and evaluate this actuation using
an elementary mechanism (a revolute joint with a bar).
The proposed mechanism is presented in section II. It has
been initially studied from a theoretical point of view and
simulated in [15]. The contributions of the present paper are
the prototyping, control and experimental evaluation of the
solution. In particular, the actuator efﬁciency is experimen-
tally assessed in section III, before giving perspectives for
the generalization of the actuation system to multiple DOF
in section IV.
II. GENERAL PRINCIPLE
A. Proposed solutions
We ﬁrst mechanically compensate the device for gravity.
Without the inﬂuence of gravity, only the inertia and the
friction effects have to be counteracted to move the system.
As a consequence, the required actuation torque can be low.
The statically balanced system will remain stable in any
conﬁguration, even without friction or braking. This is a clas-
sical problem and the balancing is generally performed by
means of counterweights [16] or springs [17]. Counterweight
balancing solutions are easy to carry out. However, they often
result in heavy and cumbersome systems. Springs offer an
interesting alternative to obtain lighter systems [17] even if
they lead to more complex mechanisms.
The proposed solution consists in balancing the system
by means of springs, preferred to counterweights to limit
the embedded mass and the inertia and then, in indirectly
actuating the system by locally changing the balancing
around the system equilibrium.
Choosing an indirect actuation is interesting because the
actuation torque can be limited mechanically which is pre-
ferred to direct actuation, which would require software
limitations.
This actuation approach is somehow similar to the one
used in ball-shaped robots [18], where moveable masses are
displaced so as to modify the gravity center of the robots.
A comparable approach is also proposed for pick and place
robots in [19], where variable payloads can be balanced by
controlling the counterweights positions or masses depending
on the payload.
The actuation approach proposed hereafter consists in
creating a driving torque by moving the attachment points
of the static balancing mechanism. This principle is so far
used without any actuator to adjust the balancing of systems
with variable payloads [20], [21]. In this paper, we propose
to actively control the spring deﬂection in order to create the
driving torque.
B. Actuation description
We now focus on the proposed indirect actuation system
principle. Such an actuation allows us to mechanically limit
the joint torque, whatever the actuator torque. It is a major
safety advantage, compared to systems where actuators are
directly put on the joint. Furthermore, the joint remains
backdrivable even if the actuator is not.
Rotary  
motor 
!
!
!
!
G
b
 
! 
P
1 
P
2 
s 
2 u 
l
0
 
O 
x 
y 
P
0 
u 
g 
s 
L 
!L 
Arm 
Spring 
Pulley 
Cable 
u = 0 
Slider-Crank 
mechanism 
Fig. 1. Mechanism principle
The functional principle of the proposed mechanism is
illustrated in Fig. 1 by a 1 DOF system, originally introduced
in [15]. To allow a better understanding, the proportions are
not respected and all parts are drawn in a same plan.
The mechanism is composed of three main parts: the arm,
the balancing system and the actuation system. The arm is
a rigid bar of mass m
b
. Its center of gravity is denoted by
G
b
, withk
  !
OG
b
k = l
gb
where O is the center of rotation
of the joint. The inertia of the arm, expressed at G
b
along
~ z, is I
b
. The angular position is given by the angle . The
balancing system uses a linear spring which is attached to
the arm by means of a non-extensible cable. At one end,
the cable is attached to the arm in P
2
, and at the other end,
it is attached to the spring. To obtain a perfect balancing,
the cable passes through a ﬁxed point P
1
located along
the ~ y-axis, and the distance s between P
1
and P
2
should
be equal to the spring deﬂection. Note that s depends on
. Then, the cable passes by a pulley centered on P
0
. The
elongation of the spring can be modiﬁed by the indirect
actuation system, which results from a linear motion u of
P
0
along the ~ y-axis. The U-turn around the pulley makes
the mechanism more compact and minimizes the actuator
stroke length.
The arm is subjected to three external torques resulting
from gravitational effectsQ
pes
, balancing and actuationQ
el
,
and interaction with the environment Q
ext
. Assuming that
friction is negligible and that the mass and inertia of the
pulley and the spring are negligible compared to the mass
and inertia of the arm, the equation of motion of the overall
system can be written as:
(I
b
+m
b
l
2
gb
)

 =Q
ext
 Q
el
 Q
pes
(1)
with
Q
pes
= m
b
l
gb
gcos (2)
Q
el
=  kL
2
cos 
2kLcos
p
1+
2
 2sin
u (3)
5033
The prototype of the 3-DOF robot for the positioning
tasks has been built and the ﬁrst experiments of gravity
compensation have been carried out successfully (see at-
tached video). The development of the 3-DOF system for
the medical application of needle insertion is still under
process and is far beyond the scope of the present paper.
However, it is interesting for the reader to know that multiple
DOF extension is possible as it gives more generality to
the concept presented in the previous section. Note that
the size and mass of the considered device are compatibles
with human manipulation capabilities. However, the same
principle can be easily extended to large and heavy systems.
In this case, the spring stiffness is increased and more power
is required to modulate the extension of the springs. To keep
small actuators and then compact systems, dedicated force
demultiplying mechanisms can be added.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
This paper presents a new actuation technology for safe
physical human-robot interactions. It consists in the indirect
actuation of the robotic device by the control of its balancing
system. Such an actuation has many advantages for the safety
of the interaction, most notably the mechanical limitation of
the joint torque and the joint backdrivability. This system is
also interesting because the actuator can easily be put away
from the joint, typically at the base.
The system static balancing is achieved classically
by means of springs. Then, the major originality comes
from the actuation resulting from the modiﬁcation of the
spring deﬂection around the equilibrium conﬁguration.
This concept is illustrated with a one DOF prototype,
implemented and experimentally used to prove the
feasibility of the proposed approach. To perform these
experiments, an adaptive control law has been implemented.
The obtained results are satisfactory in terms of safety
and accuracy and therefore validate the detailed principle.
The approach has been generalized to a 3-DOF prototype
which takes into account several design improvements,
in particular on friction minimization and compactness
enhancement. Even though not developed in the present
paper, this system is very promising because of its lightness,
its compactness and its backdrivability, which makes it
a perfect device for haptic manipulations or ﬁne interactions.
Future works will focus on the development of the 3-DOF
system control and its implementation and adaptation for
medical tasks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank V . Van Geirt for his help in the
development and CAD model of the 3-DOF prototype.
This work has been supported by the Alsace Regional
Council, by the Institut de chirurgie mini-invasive guid´ ee
par l’image (IHU Strasbourg) and by the French government
(ANR-10-EQPX-44 and ANR-11-LABX-0004).
REFERENCES
[1] J. E. Colgate, M. Peshkin, and W. Wannasuphoprasit, “Cobots: Robots
for collaboration with human operators,” in International Mechanical
Engineering Congress and Exhibition, vol. 58, Atlanta, 1996, pp. 433–
439.
[2] R. Alami, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Bicchi, R. Bischoff, R. Chatila,
A. De Luca, A. De Santis, G. Giralt, J. Guiochet, G. Hirzinger,
F. Ingrand, V . Lippiello, R. Mattone, D. Powell, S. Sen, B. Siciliano,
G. Tonietti, and L. Villani, “Safe and dependable physical human-robot
interaction in anthropic domains: State of the art and challenges,” in
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
Workshop on Physical Human-Robot Interaction, Beijing, 2006.
[3] A. Bicchi, M. Peshkin, and J. Colgate, “Safety for physical human–
robot interaction,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano and
O. Khatib, Eds. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1335–1348.
[4] R. Van Ham, T. Sugar, B. Vanderborght, K. Hollander, and D. Lefeber,
“Compliant actuator designs. Review of actuators with passive ad-
justable compliance/controllable stiffness for robotic applications,”
IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 81–94, 2009.
[5] B. Vanderborght, A. Albu-Schaeffer, A. Bicchi, E. Burdet, D. Cald-
well, R. Carloni, M. Catalano, O. Eiberger, W. Friedl, G. Ganesh,
M. Garabini, M. Grebenstein, G. Grioli, S. Haddadin, H. Hopp-
ner, A. Jafari, M. Laffranchi, D. Lefeber, F. Petit, S. Stramigioli,
N. Tsagarakis, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham, L. Visser, and S. Wolf,
“Variable impedance actuators: A review,” Robotics and Autonomous
Systems, 2013.
[6] J. Troccaz, Ed., Medical robotics. Wiley and ISTE, 2012.
[7] K. Cleary, A. Melzer, V . Watson, G. Kronreif, and D. Stoianovici,
“Interventional robotic systems: Applications and technology state-of-
the-art,” Minimally Invasive Therapy, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 101 – 113,
2006.
[8] B. Bayle, O. Piccin, L. Barb´ e, P. Renaud, and M. de Mathelin,
Robot-Assisted Procedures in Interventional Radiology (chapter 11).
Springer, 2010, pp. 191–205.
[9] D. Stoianovici, “Urobotics - Urology robotics at Johns Hopkins,”
Computer Aided Surgery, vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 360–369, 2001.
[10] “http://www.isys.co.at/.”
[11] C. Riviere, J. Gangloff, and M. de Mathelin, “Robotic compensation
of biological motion to enhance surgical accuracy,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 94, no. 9, pp. 1705–1716, 2006.
[12] B. Maurin, B. Bayle, O. Piccin, J. Gangloff, M. de Mathelin,
C. Doignon, P. Zanne, and A. Gangi, “A patient-mounted robotic plat-
form for ct-scan guided procedures,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
Engineering, vol. 55, no. 10, pp. 2417–2425, 2008.
[13] G. Duchemin, P. Poignet, E. Dombre, and F. Pierrot, “Medically
safe and sound, human-friendly robot dependability,” IEEE Robotics
Automation Magazine, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 46–55, June 2004.
[14] M. Vermeulen and M. Wisse, “Intrinsically safe robot arm: Adjustable
static balancing and low power actuation,” International Journal of
Social Robotics, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 275–288, 2010.
[15] L. Esteveny, L. Barb´ e, and B. Bayle, “A new indirect actuation
principle for safe physical human-robot interactions,” in ASME 2013
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & Computers
and Information in Engineering Conference, Portland, USA, 2013.
[16] S. Mahalingam and A. Sharan, “The optimal balancing of the robotic
manipulators,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, vol. 3, April 1986, pp. 828–835.
[17] J. Herder, “Energy-free systems. theory, conception, and design of
statically balanced spring mechanisms,” Ph.D. dissertation, Delft Uni-
versity of Technology, 2001.
[18] T. Ylikorpi and J. Suomela, “Ball-shaped robots,” in Climbing & Walk-
ing Robots, Towards New Applications, I. Education and Publishing,
Eds., 2007, p. 546.
[19] V . Van der Wijk and J. Herder, “Force balancing of variable pay-
load by active force-balanced reconﬁguration of the mechanism,” in
ASME/IFToMM International Conference on Reconﬁgurable Mecha-
nisms and Robots, June 2009, pp. 323–330.
[20] B. Wisse, W. van Dorsser, R. Barents, and J. Herder, “Energy-free
adjustment of gravity equilibrators using the virtual spring concept,”
in IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics,
june 2007, pp. 742–750.
[21] R. Barents, M. Schenk, W. van Dorsser, B. Wisse, and J. Herder,
“Spring-to-spring balancing as energy-free adjustment method in grav-
ity equilibrators,” ASME Conference Proceedings, pp. 689–700, 2009.
5037
