Experimental Comparison of Slip Detection Strategies
by Tactile Sensing with the BioTac
R 
on the DLR Hand Arm System
Jens Reinecke, Alexander Dietrich, Florian Schmidt, and Maxime Chalon
DLR - German Aerospace Center
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics
Email: jens.reinecke@dlr.de
Abstract— Dexterous manipulation of everyday objects re-
quires a precise tactile sense. Slip detection is mandatory
to overcome uncertainty and compensate for external distur-
bances. We compare three different approaches for detecting
slip. The methods are model-based slip detection via friction
cones, vibration-based detection via bandpass ﬁltering, and a
common learning algorithm. They are implemented and tested
on a tendon-driven two-ﬁnger setup equipped with two tactile
BioTac
R 
sensors. Several experiments are conducted to evaluate
each approach. The characteristics of the methods are discussed
and compared.
I. INTRODUCTION
In order to approach the human grasping capabilities,
tactile sensing is undoubtedly a major step on the way. It
allows to measure contact forces, contact points, and contact
directions directly. Thus, internal and external forces can
be distinguished precisely. In-hand localization [1] can be
signiﬁcantly improved by using tactile sensor information
to deal with kinematic and dynamic uncertainties. Vision
systems can be supported and relieved that way. More-
over, tactile sensing allows to estimate contact surfaces
and identify different materials, and it greatly improves the
identiﬁcation of objects. Finally, the additional sensor data
can also be utilized to detect slip.
Research on slip detection has a long history: Work from
1987 can be found measuring the acoustic signal occurring
during slip [2]. In [3] two algorithms are compared mainly
considering the frequency domain of the center of force
distribution and the frequency domain of the normal forces
measured by a rubber-based tactile sensor. There is also
work taking both translational and rotational motions into
account [4]. Another approach is presented in [5], where
several sensors (vision, joint position encoders, ﬁngertip
force/torque sensors) are fused to detect slip during rolling
contact. In [6] a 6-axis force/torque sensor is used to detect
slip. The authors propose a method to compute the slip
using the three-sigma rule and the standard deviations of
3-axis torque. A distributed-type tactile sensor is presented
in [7]. It consists of bridge elements that are capable of
measuring the force in three directions. One can evaluate
the pressure distribution, which can be used to compute the
center of pressure (COP) and to detect slip. In [8] a COP
sensor is presented. The dropping force in the beginning of
slip is used to adapt the grasping forces of a multi-ﬁngered
hand. Machine learning algorithms have been applied to a
Fig. 1: Two-ﬁnger setup with BioTac
R 
sensors
tactile sensor for detecting slip in [9]. Recent approaches
[10], [11], [12] develop artiﬁcial skins to detect slip. In
[10], [12] methods are proposed to analyse the frequencies
which are measured by ﬂexible conductive wires in a ﬂexible
material. There are multiple ways of detecting slippage, e. g.
via COP motion, acoustic signals, sensor fusion, or frequency
analyses.
The main contribution of this paper is the experimental
evaluation, comparison, and discussion of three different slip
detection methods: a model-based slip detection via friction
cones, a vibration-based detection via bandpass ﬁltering, and
a common learning algorithm. These three methods have
been chosen to compare approaches based on completely
different physical principles. The friction cone approach is
an intuitive way to detect slip by taking the estimated contact
forces and materials into account. Applying knowledge about
vibrations encountered during slip implies using frequency
information instead of contact force and contact direction.
The third approach, i. e. the learning algorithm, employs all
available sensory information to determine slip by generating
decision trees based on abtract, mathematical algorithms.
Hence, apart from handing over the (nonprocessed) sensor
signals and the ground truth about slip occurence during a
training phase in advance, the user is not involved in terms
of any further knowledge or modeling. Each of the three
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2742
methods has already been applied in the context of slip
detection. To the best of our knowledge a direct comparison
has not been performed so far. For the experimental evalua-
tion, two opposing ﬁngers of the DLR Hand Arm System
[13] are equipped with BioTac
R 
tactile sensors. Several
characteristics of the detection concepts are investigated to
meet the requirements of a proper comparison. These are slip
detection quality, robustness against impacts, and robustness
against disturbances induced by robot motions.
The organization is as follows: After a brief introduction
to our test setup in Sec. II, the slip detection methods are
introduced and explained in Sec. III. They are experimentally
evaluated in Sec. IV and extensively discussed and compared
in Sec. V.
II. TEST SETUP
For the experimental validation of the slip measure-
ment approaches, we use a two-ﬁnger setup with two
BioTac
R 
sensors to reduce the complexity. This section
describes the main components of the test setup, namely the
ﬁngers, the BioTac
R 
sensors, and the software.
A. Two-Finger Setup extracted from the DLR Hand Arm
System
The DLR Hand Arm System [13] is the initial step towards
a new humanoid robot which can be operated safely and
robustly in dynamic environments. Its Awiwi
1
hand [14]
is an anthropomorphic, tendon-driven mechanism with 19
DOF (degrees of freedom). Motions are realized by 38
antagonistically arranged motors in the forearm. Additional
spring elements on each tendon in the forearm lead to a
high degree of mechanical robustness of the system. The
sensors are shielded from impacts by placing them after these
springs. This design choice also results in a more compact
hand structure because most of the large mechanical and
electronic components (motors, sensors, power electronics,
gear boxes, communication) are outsourced into the forearm.
Joint torques are computed via the tendon forces in the fore-
arm [15]. The link side positions are model-based computed
from the motor position. However, the torque measurement
quality is impaired by the tendon guiding friction. Both types
of guiding used (bearings and sliding) inject friction into
the system. Hence, the lack of link side sensing results in
degraded grasping performance because uncertainties cannot
be observed precisely, and the dissipating effects are not
easily identiﬁable.
To create a practical setup, the Awiwi hand is simpliﬁed
in preparation for the experiments. An adapter is designed to
hold two ﬁngers and guide their tendons to the motors in the
forearm. It is 3D printed with a simple PLA
2
polymer. The
two ﬁngers have low friction due to bearings in each joint
and bearings for guiding the tendons over the joints. To use
the BioTac
R 
sensors with the Awiwi hand ﬁnger, the DIP
1
The Awiwi Hand is the hand of the Hand Arm System. ”Awiwi” comes
from the Hawaiian and means ”very fast”.
2
Polylactic acid is a thermoplastic aliphatic polyester.
Fig. 2: BioTac
R 
sensor
joint is removed and the PIP bone is replaced by an adapter
to hold the BioTac
R 
sensor.
B. BioTac
R 
The BioTac
R 
has been developed since 2006. It uses
three different measurement principles. 19 electrodes receive
signals from four emitters measuring the impedance in the
ﬂuid between skin and bone surface. Their spatial distribution
is restricted to the lower and front part of the ﬁnger tip.
The electrodes can measure up to 12 bit impedance enabling
the user to compute the contact position and direction by
a weighted sum. The signals from the fast pressure sensors
are processed by the inner electronics and output a slow and
ﬁltered pressure value, which is very precise ([16], p. 121).
The raw pressure values obtained at 4.5 kHz can be used to
measure vibrations which can be identiﬁed by a Fast Fourier
Transformation (FFT), for example. Finally the third sensor
type is a thermistor, providing temperature information of
the touched surface supporting the material identiﬁcation
capabilities.
C. Software setup
The BioTac
R 
sensors cannot be directly integrated into
the forearm electronics. Therefore, they are connected to a
BeagleBoard, which organizes the SPI communication and
conﬁgures the sensor reading on the internal electronics. A
conﬁguration ﬁle can be assigned to the BeagleBoard to
change acquisition sequence and the reading timing [17]. The
BioTac
R 
data is provided to the real time machine via UDP
(User Datagram Protocol) port, which runs the two-ﬁnger
setup software. This software is programmed in Simulink
and compiled to C code. To view the results a viewer was
programmed showing the contact point, contact force, ﬁnger
conﬁguration, and the resultant of the measured forces of the
BioTac
R 
sensors, see Fig. 3 and the attached video.
III. SLIP DETECTION
In this section, we introduce three slip detection methods
which are based on fundamentally different approaches. The
2743
QNX realtime
system:
- controller-
  simulink-model
- setup driver
sends commands
to realtime model
Two Finger
Setup
Linux system:
- generate C code
- connects to
  running Simulink
  model to configure
  online
SpaceWire
sends data to
Simulink GUI
BioTac
®
Sensors
BeagleBoard:
- SPI communi-
cation
- sensor config.
SPI
network UDP connection
Viewer:
- shows contact
 point, forces
network UDP connection
Fig. 3: Software setup with communication
friction cone approach in Sec. III-A utilizes a friction model
to estimate the actual contact state, the bandwidth ﬁlter in
Sec. III-B considers the frequencies emerging from slipping
surfaces, and Sec. III-C applies a common learning algorithm
that uses experience about slip gained in advance.
A. Friction Cone
1) Principle Description: If the contact force stays inside
the friction cone, the grasp is known to be stable. Modern
tactile sensors provide sufﬁcient sensory information to de-
termine contact points, forces, and directions. The angle is
spanned between the estimated contact normal (based on the
geometry of the ﬁngertip) and the measured force direction.
The direct relation to the material-combination dependent
friction coefﬁcient  is
 = tan(
0
) : (1)
The borders of the friction cone are described by the maxi-
mum allowed angle
0
. The slippage is detected if the contact
force is leaving the cone, that is 
0
.
2) Processing: The cone axis describes the nominal con-
tact normal. According to [18], the BioTac
R 
sensor can be
seen as half of a cylinder with a quarter sphere at the end.
In order to ﬁnd the contact normal to the contact point
on the cylinder, one has to distinguish between contact
points on the cylinder and contact points on the spherical
part of the ﬁngertip. On the cylinder, the vector between
the perpendicular of the measured contact point onto the
rotational axis deﬁnes the contact normal. On the spherical
part of the ﬁngertip, the vector between sphere center point
and contact point is chosen. The angle  can be easily
computed from that normal and the measured contact force,
see Fig. 4. One has to keep in mind that the measured force
must exceed a minimum threshold to be a reliable indicator
for slip. Otherwise, noise in the force could cause  values
without contact at all. The minimum treshold depends on the
material combination and the grasp performed.
B. Bandwidth Filter on the Pressure Sensor Signal
1) Principle Description: In [16] the author describes
how slip can be identiﬁed in the spectral analysis of the
fast pressure sensor. He proposes a method which considers
the amplitudes between 30 Hz and 200 Hz in particular.
This frequency range represents the vibrations during typical
thumb
index
object
Fig. 4: Friction cone shown in the contact point plane, where
N describes the normal force,F
f
the friction force, andF
c
the contact force
slippage. Interestingly, force and velocity do not inﬂuence the
borders of this frequency band ([16], p. 48). An alternative
detection method based on frequency analysis is proposed in
[3].
2) Processing: The pressure signals of the
BioTac
R 
sensor are available at 207 Hz (slow, ﬁltered
signal) or at 4.5 kHz (unﬁltered signal) [17]. The data
reading of the analog digital converters is delayed by 25s
in our conﬁguration in order to reduce the crosstalk between
the sensors. This effect is created by the capacitors in the
A/D converters, which are not able to load fast enough
from previous to current value. As a result, the frequency
of 207 Hz is relatively low for the complete data packet.
A packet contains 22 different fast pressure sensor values,
which can be used to get the fast signal at 4.5 kHz. Since
one packet with 22 values comes only at 207 Hz, the fast
bandpass ﬁlter signal has a delay of approximately 5 ms.
The obtained signal is ﬁnally bandpass ﬁltered with the
proposed band between 30–200 Hz. Afterwards, the signal
is post-processed
3
.
C. Learning Algorithm
1) Principle Description: Since it is not intuitive for a
human to extract slip as a ”binary value” from the large set of
information provided by the BioTac
R 
sensor, an automated
learning algorithm is suited in this context. Such a learning
algorithm can be fed with large data sets from any sensors,
as long as the real slip case is additionally given to the
algorithm. The ground truth must be either manually given
or be obtained with the help of an extra sensor. In the present
case, the pulling speed of the object is used. After the training
phase, the algorithm can be used to detect slip based on the
input data.
2) Processing: For the learning algorithm the open source
python library Scikit-learn [19] was chosen and the random
forest classiﬁer was selected in particular. A forest of ran-
domized decision trees is created on a set of data collected
over 80 ms. The default settings of the Scikit-learn algorithm
were used with 200 estimators. The forest classiﬁers require
two arrays: one training set which contains in our case 750
samples and the truth about the slip of every sample. One
sample contains 8160 features, which are all 34 different
sensor values (see Table I) collected 240 times (time window
3
A PT1 element is applied to the absolute values of the ﬁltered signal.
2744
TABLE I: Available signals in the two ﬁnger setup per ﬁnger
Signal Description Size f [kHz]
motor position incremental encoder in the motor 6 3
tendon force tendon forces measured by the hall sensors in the spring elements in the forearm 6 3
BioTac
R 
electrodes measured impedance from the electrodes BioTac
R 
19 0.2
BioTac
R 
thermistor temperature from BioTac
R 
1 0.2
BioTac
R 
pressure ﬁltered ﬂuid pressure in the BioTac
R 
sensor, ﬁltered for a smooth signal 1 0.2
BioTac
R 
pressure unﬁltered ﬂuid pressure measured very fast for frequency analysis 1 4.5
TABLE II: Hypothesis and Experiments
Exp. Short Description Section
I Pulling in x-direction Sec. IV-A
II Pulling in y-direction Sec. IV-A
III Disturbance by impact Sec. IV-B
IV Disturbance by motion Sec. IV-C
of 80 ms at 3 kHz). Half of the 750 samples is used for
learning and the other half for validation. The difﬁculty
in this approach is to teach all possible cases such that
the algorithm does not learn speciﬁc cases but the generic
identiﬁcation of slip. It may happen that the algorithm ﬁnds
a simple COP motion, but if the fed cases are well selected,
the algorithm can extract relationships that are too complex
for humans to notice. Parameters for the algorithms are the
combination of sensor input, measurement window size, the
number of tree estimators, and the maximum features created
when splitting a node in the tree. Increasing the number
of estimators improves the quality of the learned signal,
since the overﬁtting is decreased. However, it increases the
computation time. Notice that the quality also saturates w. r. t.
the number of estimators. Available signals from the test
setup are shown in Table I. The forest was created ofﬂine
in a training program. It can be saved and loaded to process
the sensor signals online.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section the three approaches are tested in multiple
experiments, see Table II. The ﬁrst two experiments (Sec. IV-
A) investigate the slip detection at constant slip velocity. The
third experiment (Sec. IV-B) investigates external impacts
on the table or ground (such as footsteps) and the fourth
considers oscillations or peaks induced by the robot gears and
motors (Sec. IV-C). In the last section the video attachment
is described, which shows that a grasp-enhancing controller
employing the three signals achieves a good performance.
A. Detection Quality
1) Experiment Description: The goal of this experiment
is to compare the slip detection quality of each approach.
Therefore, the ﬁrst step consists in building a ground truth.
To do so, an object is attached to a stiff tendon
4
which is
connected to a motor in the forearm. Thus, the object can
be moved separately from the ﬁnger motors and the sensor
data can be logged synchronously to the motor position. As
4
The used tendon is assumed to be inelastic.
Fig. 5: Fingerprint structure of the BioTac
R 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
20
40
object motion [mm]
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
10
20
?
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
2
4
bandpass signal
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
0
1
2
learned slip
Time [s]
Fig. 6: Detection quality in y-direction
motion proﬁle, a ramp with constant velocity is commanded.
Two pattern areas can be identiﬁed in the ﬁngerprint with
different directions as depicted in Fig. 5. The importance of
having textured skin is described in [20]. The developers of
the BioTac
R 
sensor describe that the effect of the ﬁngerprint
enhances the sensed vibrations [16]. Reconﬁguring the setup
allows to pull the object in both directions.
2) Results: This experiment is conducted in y-direction.
The object is pulled with constant velocity over a distance of
25 mm. The plots in Fig. 6 clearly show that all methods de-
tect the slip. The learned algorithm shows a delay and some
spurious errors, offering a less suitable input for a grasp-
enhancing controller. The friction cone and the bandwidth
approach both show peaks in the beginning due to stiction.
The results of the experiment in x-direction are depicted in
Fig. 7. From these measurements one can conclude that in
x- and y-direction the ﬁrst two approaches are more precise
and faster in detecting slippage.
2745
3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
0
5
10
object motion [mm]
3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
0
5
?
3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
0
10
20
bandpass signal
3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
0
1
2
learned slip
Time [s]
Fig. 7: Detection quality in x-direction
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
10
20
?
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
5
10
bandpass signal
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
1
2
learned slip
Time [s]
Fig. 8: Sensitivity to external disturbance
B. Disturbances by Impacts
1) Experiment Description: Two methods, i. e. the band-
width ﬁlter and the learning algorithm, use the data from
the fast pressure sensor which is able to measure and exam-
ine frequencies in the interesting region of 30–200 Hz, cf.
Sec. II-B. This sensitivity to vibrations is also a disadvantage
in terms of external disturbances from the environment. In
the following, a metal ball of 0.32 kg is dropped from a
height of 0.5 m onto the ﬂoor. The two-ﬁnger setup is placed
on a table and the ball is dropped onto the ﬂoor next to it.
2) Results: The plot of one drop is exemplarily depicted
in Fig. 8. The diagram shows that the bandwidth ﬁlter
approach measures the disturbance with up to ﬁve times the
amplitude of the slippage signal measured in the slippage
quality experiment in Sec. IV-A. The other two methods do
not feature any reaction to the ten runs.
C. Disturbances by Robot Motion
1) Experiment Description: From an application point
of view it is interesting if the robot itself affects the slip
detection procedure. In this experiment the test object is
grasped again in the same way as in the ﬁrst experiment,
and the two ﬁngers synchronously move with a sine in the
abduction direction. The experiment shows if the detection is
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
object motion [mm]
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
5
?
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
5
bandpass signal
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
1
2
learned slip
Time [s]
Fig. 9: Measurement of disturbances induced by the motion
of the ﬁngers
robust to internally generated noise. Among others, this noise
is generated by the motors, the gear boxes, the tendons, and
the controller itself.
2) Results: The results in Fig. 9 show that the parallel
motion of the ﬁngers has a small inﬂuence in the friction
cone approach. This is due to a very small difference of
friction in the two ﬁngers, leading to a small difference in
the amplitude of the sine motion. But it is not signiﬁcantly
disturbed by the motion, since the computation of the gamma
depends on the electrodes, which are not sensitive to the
induced frequencies. The bandpass signal shows twice the
amplitude of a nominal slip signal, which might prevent
the detection of slippage while manipulating an object. The
learning experiment indicates no inﬂuence by the ﬁnger
motion. This experiment shows that the sensitivity of the
pressure sensor is really high and shows that the motors
excite frequencies included in the analysed bandpass. A
more damped mechanical connection between the sensor and
the joints could reduce the amplitudes of internally induced
frequencies.
D. Video Explanation
The controller is based on a human behavior that consists
in squeezing the object if slippage is detected. In [21] an
approach is shown. For the setup a simple P-controller was
implemented. As input for the controller the slip detection
signal from the three methods was used. The controller
output is simply an addition to the joint torque to grasp more
ﬁrmly. The controller is active only if a minimal grasping
force is measured so as to avoid erratic behavior. The potato
chip shows that the object is grasped very softly. As soon
as it starts to slip the controller reacts and the potato chip
crushes.
V. DISCUSSION
The experiments cover multiple characteristics of the three
methods. These are summarized in Table III. The pulling
2746
TABLE III: Slip detection approaches
Attribute Friction cone Bandpass ﬁlter Learned signal
moment of detection before and during slip during slip before and during slip
frequency 207Hz 3kHz 7Hz
robustness to impacts robust very sensitive robust
robustness to motion robust sensitive robust
direction dependency ﬁngerprint dependent ﬁngerprint dependent ﬁngerprint dependent
implementation difﬁculty medium easy various learning cases needed
model required not required not required
advantages(+) and + robust to disturbances + easy to use + no model required
drawbacks(-) + short reaction time + short reaction time + easy to implement
- model required for detection - sensitive to external disturbances - long training phase
- fast sensor required - long reaction time
possible improvements automated threshold adjusting vibration damped mounting use library working on
for the BioTacs a real time machine
preprocess features instead
of using the raw data
suitable applications robust grasping during ﬁne manipulation, automated learning of
disturbances handling fragile objects complex situations
experiment showed that all methods are capable of detecting
the slip in the two considered directions. The learning
algorithm, however, showed a delay when detecting slip,
which could be due to too few estimators in the learning
algorithm. Considering detection time, the bandpass ﬁlter
and the friction cone approach are superior to the learning
algorithm. However, all methods have a delay of about 5 ms
due to the sampling time of one BioTac
R 
data packet. But
this time span is theoretically sufﬁcient to react to slip while
grasping an object, since it can only fall about 0.12 mm freely
within in 5 ms. The slow learning algorithm is not practical
in a grasping force controller as we have shown in the ex-
periments. Choosing another learning method could certainly
lead to an improvement in the detection time but the general
problem of the high computational effort will still remain.
Regarding the quality of detection, the ﬁngerprint is essential.
All methods featured improved detection performance when
the object was pulled orthogonal to the ﬁngerprint pattern.
But that also means that objects could cause problems if they
only slip parallel to the ﬁngerprint lines. The disturbance
experiments showed that the bandpass signal sensitivity is
disadvantageous if disturbances occur externally or inter-
nally. On the other hand this sensitivity is necessary to detect
slip with small grasping forces. To increase the applicability
of that method, the damping of the mechanical connection
between BioTac
R 
and robot ﬁngers could be improved. The
other two methods are robust to that kind of disturbance.
Concerning the complexity of implementing the approaches,
the bandpass approach is the simplest to implement, followed
by the friction cone approach. The learning algorithm is
rather complex since it needs a training and a predicting
program for the slip signal. The variety and combination
of possible input data and learning algorithm parameters
offers a multiple of possibilities, but also complexity. If one
does not want to deal with this high degree of complexity,
providing the algorithm with all available sensor signals has
to be paid by more computational effort.
Overall, each approach is able to detect slip and each
approach has clear disadvantages. The friction cone approach
requires a good model of the material combination. Addition-
ally, the Coulomb friction assumes a simple contact situation
which is not present on the ﬂexible ﬁngertip sensor, and
therefore, the threshold for detecting slip has to be adjusted
for each grasp. Modeling the complex contact is not trivial
and was not scope of this paper. Furthermore, a minimum
force has to be applied to measure a reliable force direction,
see Sec. III-A.2. The bandpass ﬁlter approach is too sensitive
if the mechanical connection to the ﬁngers is stiff, but it
does not need a model of the object or the skin. Finally, the
learning algorithm needs some time to be implemented and
taught. It requires further implementation work to improve
computation time, but it does not need a model in turn.
As shown above, the three methods have drawbacks that
prevent them from being suitable in all applications. How-
ever, an elaborate fusion of the concepts could get rid of the
disadvantages and beneﬁt from the individual advantages of
the concepts.
VI. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this paper a two-ﬁnger setup with BioTac
R 
sensors is
set up and explained. Three slip detection methods were de-
scribed and implemented on the test setup. An evaluation of
the methods was made using real measurements in multiple
experiments. The results were discussed and compared in
detail, which constitutes the main contribution of this work.
The comparison was summarized in a table and proposed
applications for each approach. In the future the algorithms
will be further augmented and fused to improve both robust-
ness and detection quality. The learning algorithm can be
reimplemented to be run on the real-time machine to increase
2747
the frame rate. On the two-ﬁnger setup the BioTac
R 
sensor
will be used to develop and implement algorithms enabling
the full Awiwi hand to grasp safer by knowing the exact
state (contact points, object position, applied forces) of the
object in the hand. Additionally, the BioTac
R 
sensor values
can be used to evaluate grasp quality to create a database
for the robot with real measured data of grasp quality. We
aim at integrating slip detection and reaction into our recently
developed whole-body control frameworks and dynamic task
hierarchies [22], [23].
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Florian Schmidt (DLR),
who programmed the communication of the BeagleBoard
with the BioTac
R 
sensor. The adapter for the two ﬁnger
setup and the BioTac
R 
sensor adapter were designed by
Werner Friedl (DLR), who we also would like to thank.
This work has been funded in parts by the European Com-
missions Seventh Framework Programme as part of the
project The Hand Embodied (grant no. 248587). The authors
are with the Robotics and Mechatronics Center (RMC),
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Oberpfaffenhofen, 82234
Wessling, Germany.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Chalon, J. Reinecke, and M. Pfanne, “Online in-hand object
localization,” in Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013, pp. 2977–2984.
[2] D. Dornfeld and C. Handy, “Slip detection using acoustic emission
signal analysis,” in Proc. of the 1987 IEEE International Conference
Robotics and Automation, vol. 4, pp. 1868–1875.
[3] E. Holweg, H. Hoeve, W. Jongkind, L. Marconi, C. Melchiorri,
and C. Bonivento, “Slip detection by tactile sensors: Algorithms
and experimental results,” in Proc. of the 1996 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, vol. 4, pp. 3234–3239.
[4] C. Melchiorri, “Slip detection and control using tactile and force
sensors,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 235–243, 2000.
[5] T. Hasegawa and K. Honda, “Detection and measurement of ﬁngertip
slip in multi-ﬁngered precision manipulation with rolling contact,”
in Proc. of the International Conference on Multisensor Fusion and
Integration for Intelligent Systems, 2001, pp. 43–48.
[6] H. Kanno, H. Nakamoto, F. Kobayashi, F. Kojima, and W. Fukui,
“Slip detection using robot ﬁngertip with 6-axis force/torque sensor,”
in Robotic Intelligence In Informationally Structured Space (RiiSS),
2013 IEEE Workshop on, April 2013, pp. 1–6.
[7] N. Tsujiuchi, T. Koizumi, A. Ito, H. Oshima, Y . Nojiri, Y . Tsuchiya,
and S. Kurogi, “Slip detection with distributed-type tactile sensor,” in
Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems. IEEE, 2004, pp. 331–336.
[8] D. Gunji, Y . Mizoguchi, S. Teshigawara, A. Ming, A. Namiki,
M. Ishikawaand, and M. Shimojo, “Grasping force control of multi-
ﬁngered robot hand based on slip detection using tactile sensor,”
in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. IEEE, 2008, pp. 2605–2610.
[9] A. Mazid and A. Ali, “Grasping force estimation detecting slip by
tactile sensor adopting machine learning techniques,” in TENCON
2008 - 2008 IEEE Region 10 Conference, Nov 2008, pp. 1–6.
[10] M. Strohmayr, “Artiﬁcial skin in robotics: a comprehensive interface
for system-environment interaction,” Ph.D. dissertation, Karlsruhe,
Karlsruher Institut fuÌ
´
Lr Technologie (KIT), Diss., 2012, 2012.
[11] I. Fujimoto, Y . Yamada, T. Morizono, Y . Umetani, and T. Maeno,
“Development of artiﬁcial ﬁnger skin to detect incipient slip for real-
ization of static friction sensation,” in Proc. of the IEEE International
Conference on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent
Systems. IEEE, 2003, pp. 15–20.
[12] M. Vatani, E. D. Engeberg, and J.-W. Choi, “Force and slip detection
with direct-write compliant tactile sensors using multi-walled carbon
nanotubes/polymer composites,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical,
2013.
[13] M. Grebenstein, A. Albu-Schäffer, T. Bahls, M. Chalon, O. Eiberger,
W. Friedl, R. Gruber, U. Hagn, R. Haslinger, H. Höppner, S. Jörg,
M. Nickl, A. Nothhelfer, F. Petit, J. Reill, N. Seitz, T. Wimböck,
S. Wolf, T. Wüsthoff, and G. Hirzinger, “The DLR Hand Arm System,”
in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2011, pp. 3175–3182.
[14] M. Grebenstein, “Approaching human performance: The functionality
driven awiwi robot hand,” Ph.D. dissertation, ETH, 2012.
[15] W. Friedl, J. Reinecke, M. Chalon, and G. Hirzinger, “FAS A
Flexible Antagonistic Spring element for a high performance tendon
driven hand,” in Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2011, pp. 1366–1372.
[16] J. A. Fishel, “Design and use of a biomimetic tactile microvibration
sensor with human-like sensitivity and its application in texture
discrimination using bayesian exploration,” Ph.D. dissertation, 2012.
[17] G. L. Jeremy Fishel and G. Loeb, Biotac Product Manual, SynTouch
LLC, February 2013.
[18] F. J. L. G. Lin, C.H., “Estimating point of contact, force and torque
in a biomimetic tactile sensor,” Tech. Rep.
[19] F. Pedregosa, G. Varoquaux, A. Gramfort, V . Michel, B. Thirion,
O. Grisel, M. Blondel, P. Prettenhofer, R. Weiss, V . Dubourg, J. Van-
derplas, A. Passos, D. Cournapeau, M. Brucher, M. Perrot, and
E. Duchesnay, “Scikit-learn: Machine learning in Python,” Journal
of Machine Learning Research, vol. 12, pp. 2825–2830, 2011.
[20] M. Cutkosky, J. Jourdain, and P. Wright, “Skin materials for robotic
ﬁngers,” in Robotics and Automation. Proceedings. 1987 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on, vol. 4, Mar 1987, pp. 1649–1654.
[21] T. Takahashi, T. Tsuboi, T. Kishida, Y . Kawanami, S. Shimizu,
M. Iribe, T. Fukushima, and M. Fujita, “Adaptive grasping by multi
ﬁngered hand with tactile sensor based on robust force and position
control,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, 2008, pp. 264–271.
[22] A. Dietrich, T. Wimböck, A. Albu-Schäffer, and G. Hirzinger, “Re-
active Whole-Body Control: Dynamic Mobile Manipulation Using a
Large Number of Actuated Degrees of Freedom,” IEEE Robotics &
Automation Magazine, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 20–33, June 2012.
[23] A. Dietrich, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Schäffer, “Multi-Objective Com-
pliance Control of Redundant Manipulators: Hierarchy, Control, and
Stability,” in Proc. of the 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, November 2013, pp. 3043–3050.
2748
