Motion Planning and Control of Ladder Climbing on DRC-Hubo for
DARPA Robotics Challenge
Yajia Zhang
1
Jingru Luo
1
Kris Hauser
1
, H. Andy Park
2
Manas Paldhe
2
C. S. George Lee
2
,
Robert Ellenberg
3
Brittany Killen
3
Paul Oh
3
, Jun Ho Oh
4
, Jungho Lee
5
Inhyeok Kim
5
Abstract—This video presents our preliminary work towards
addressing the ladder climbing event in DARPA Robotics
Challenge (DRC) using DRC-Hubo robot. A ladder-climbing
motion planner is developed which generates a collision-free,
stable quasi-static trajectory for execution. Compliance control
isenabledonarmjointstocompensateforthecalibrationerror,
modeling error and control error. We have demonstrated that
DRC-Hubocanrobustlyclimbavarietyofladdersinsimulation
and successfully climb a ship ladder on the hardware.
I. INTRODUCTION
We present our undergoing work for the ladder climbing
task in DRC whose goal is to provide robots human-like
navigation, manipulation and perception capabilities in dan-
gerous, degraded, and human-engineered environments. We
are using DRC-Hubo as the platform, which is a full-size
humanoid robot designed and built by Rainbow Co. specially
for Team DRC-Hubo participating in DRC track A compe-
tition. The video shows the following: 1) motion primitive
based ladder-climbing planner and compliance control; 2)
DRC-Hubo robustly climbing various ladders in simulation
and hardware veriﬁcation on a standard ship ladder.
II. OPEN-LOOP SYSTEM PIPELINE
Our preliminary work focuses on enabling and verifying
the capabilities of ladder climbing for DRC-Hubo. For sim-
plicity, we assume the ladder speciﬁcation, relative robot-
ladder position and orientation are known. Our system in-
cludes the following major modules:
1) Ladder-Climbing Planner[1]: takes the parameterized
ladder speciﬁcation, relative robot-ladder position and
orientation as input, and outputs a collision-free, stable
quasi-static motion for climbing the ladder.
2) hubo-ach: a low-level controller for DRC-Hubo based
on ACH Inter-Process Communication library [2], [3].
The compliance control is implemented in this module.
*This work was supported by the Defense Advanced Research Projects
Agency (DARPA) award # N65236-12-1-1005 for the DARPA Robotics
Challenge. Any opinion, ﬁndings, and conclusions or recommendations
expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily
reﬂect the views of DARPA.
1
School of Informatics & Computing, Indiana University Bloomington,
USA fzhangyaj,luojing,hauserkg@indiana.edu
2
School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA
fandypark,mpaldhe,csgleeg@purdue.edu
3
Mechanical Engineering & Mechanics, Drexel Uni-
versity, USA frwe24, bak48g@drexel.edu,
paul@coe.drexel.edu
4
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, South Korea
jhoh@kaist.ac.kr
5
Rainbow Co., South Korea jungho77@rainbow.re.kr,
inhyeok@kaist.ac.kr
III. LADDER-CLIMBING MOTION PLANNER
We have developed a ladder-climbing motion planner
based on the idea of motion primitives. A motion primitive
is a solution to one sub-task of the motion-planning problem.
The ladder-climbing motion can be divided into a sequence
of climbing actions with each ﬁnishing one sub-task: hands
reaching higher on the rail, feet moving to a higher rung, etc.
Each motion primitive, designed by human expert, contains
prior knowledge, e.g., hand/foot contacts, robot poses to keep
balance, waypoints to avoid collision, for solving a speciﬁc
action. The planner utilizes motion primitives as seeds to
generate a motion for the new environment.
IV. COMPLIANCE CONTROL
Ladder-climbing motion for a humanoid robot usually
involves four limbs in contact. These contacts form multiple
closed kinematic chains which make the motion sensitive to
calibration, control and modeling errors. Simple joint-space
control does not work since even small errors can cause
excessive contradictory force on the joints, which will shut
down/damage the motor. To solve this, we have developed a
compliance controller, which controls the current indirectly
by limiting PWM on motors to adjust output torque, to enable
compliance on the arm joints to compensate for errors.
V. EXPERIMENTS & CONCLUSION
Our ladder-climbing motion planner is proven to be able to
solve for various ladders, including A-frame ladders, regular
ladders and ship ladders in simulation. Particularly, within 2
minutes cut-off time, it can solve most (72%) of the regular
ladders with inclination from 70

to 90

and rung spacing
from 20cm to 35cm with 1

/1cm increment respectively.
We also have veriﬁed our strategy on a standard industrial
ship ladder, which is similar to the one speciﬁed by DARPA
for DRC using hardware. The motion planner generates a
collision-free and stable trajectory within 15 seconds and
the motion execution is ﬁnished in 7 minutes by DRC-Hubo
in open-loop. The compliance control was veriﬁed to be able
to compensate for errors caused by multiple factors.
REFERENCES
[1] Y . Zhang, J. Luo, K. Hauser, R. Ellenberg, P. Oh, H. Park, M. Paldhe,
and C. S. G. Lee, “Motion planning of ladder climbing for humanoid
robots,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Technologies for Practical Robot Appli-
cations (TePRA), 2013.
[2] N. Dantam and M. Stilman, “Robust and efﬁcient communication for
real-time multi-process robot software,” in Proc. IEEE-RAS Int. Conf.
on Humanoid Robots., 2012, pp. 316–322.
[3] M. Grey, N. Dantam, D. Lofaro, A. Bobick, M. Egerstedt, P. Oh, and
M. Stilman, “Multi-process control software for hubo2 plus robot,”
in Proc. Int. Conf. on Technologies for Practical Robot Applications
(TePRA), 2013.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2086
