Lighting Invariant Urban Street Classiﬁcation
Ben Upcroft
1
, Colin McManus
2
, Winston Churchill
2
, Will Maddern
2
and Paul Newman
2
Abstract— In this paper we propose the hybrid use of
illuminant invariant and RGB images to perform image classiﬁ-
cation of urban scenes despite challenging variation in lighting
conditions. Coping with lighting change (and the shadows
thereby invoked) is a non-negotiable requirement for long term
autonomy using vision. One aspect of this is the ability to
reliably classify scene components in the presence of marked
and often sudden changes in lighting. This is the focus of this
paper.
Posed with the task of classifying all parts in a scene
from a full colour image, we propose that lighting invariant
transforms can reduce the variability of the scene, resulting
in a more reliable classiﬁcation. We leverage the ideas of
“data transfer” for classiﬁcation, beginning with full colour
images for obtaining candidate scene-level matches using global
image descriptors. This is commonly followed by superpixel-
level matching with local features. However, we show that if the
RGB images are subjected to an illuminant invariant transform
before computing the superpixel-level features, classiﬁcation is
signiﬁcantly more robust to scene illumination effects.
The approach is evaluated using three datasets. The ﬁrst
being our own dataset and the second being the KITTI
dataset using manually generated ground truth for quantitative
analysis. We qualitatively evaluate the method on a third custom
dataset over a 750 m trajectory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Vision-based classiﬁcation methods heavily rely on the
similarity in appearance between training data. However,
lighting variation can cause the very same scene or object to
appear very different from one image to the next. This dif-
ference can cause adverse effects to classiﬁcation algorithms
resulting in poor performance -“it just looks so different”. For
autonomous systems operating over extended time scales,
such as days and weeks, illumination changes are detrimental
if high level understanding from low level pixel data is to be
achieved.
Over recent years, illuminant invariant transforms have
been proposed which are able to signiﬁcantly reduce this
illumination variation in outdoor scenes [1], [2]. A number
of these transforms reduce a three-channel RGB image to
a single channel colour space. Therefore, the invariance
provided by these transforms comes with the reduction in
discriminative information available in the colour channels.
As a result, classiﬁcation solely dependent on lighting in-
variant transforms of an image can often fail.
Rather than using one or the other, we show that RGB
images allow excellent context matching between images,
1
Ben Upcroft is with the School of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, Queensland University of Technology, Australia. e-
mail:ben.upcroft@qut.edu.au.
2
Colin McManus, Winston Churchill, Will Maddern, and Paul Newman
are with the Mobile Robotics Group, University of Oxford, UK. e-mail:
colin,winston,wm,pnewman@robots.ox.ac.uk.
Fig. 1. A comparison of classiﬁcation results for the same scene using
an RGB image (top row) and a lighting invariant image (bottom row). Top
row: RGB image and its corresponding classiﬁcation. Bottom row: lighting
invariant version of the same image and its corresponding classiﬁcation.
Note how the shadow on the road is correctly classiﬁed when using the
lighting invariant image.
while illuminant invariant images provide very good local
discriminitave capabilities within an image. Data transfer
methods for image classiﬁcation enable the combination of
these images by exploiting the two stage process of scene-
level matching using global image features from the RGB
images and local super-pixel feature matching from the
lighting invariant images. By employing the two types of
data as input to the classiﬁcation problem, the advantages of
both are gained, resulting in robust classiﬁcation even under
highly varying lighting conditions (Fig. 1).
This paper is organised as follows. Section II will discuss
related work in scene classiﬁcation techniques and the use
of lighting invariant images in robotics applications. Section
III provides a system overview, summarising the basic seg-
mentation algorithm, our lighting-invariant image transform,
and describing how we incorporate the lighting-invariant
images in our pipeline. Section IV presents quantitative
results on two challenging outdoor datasets: (i) a custom
dataset collected at Oxford, and (ii) the KITTI dataset. A
qualitative analysis on over 750 m of data around the Oxford
Begbroke Science Park is also presented. Section V provides
a discussion of our method and results, with an emphasis
on the current limitations and how we plan on moving
forward to enable robust scene classiﬁcation in the presence
of extreme illumination changes.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1712
II. RELATED WORK
Semantic multi-class segmentation has seen consistent
activity in the computer vision domain [3], [4], [5], [6]. These
approaches commonly employ ofﬂine training or learning
using a variety of feature representations like appearance,
colour, shape or depth to model each class in the scene. These
features are then combined to build a spatial smoothness
prior for a Markov Random Field (MRF) or Conditional Ran-
dom Field (CRF) optimisation to infer a label for each pixel
or superpixel (i.e., pixel sets with homogeneous attributes).
These parametric approaches can take hours to days to train,
where training needs to be repeated if new example classes
are included in the dataset.
To complement the parametric techniques, data-driven
approaches for scene inference have been investigated [7],
[8], [9], [10], [11]. These approaches do not require a training
step and examples of new classes can be simply added to
the dataset. Initial work in this area concentrated on global
feature descriptors to match entire images [12], [9] but have
more recently included a second step in which local features
within an image are also considered [7], [8], [10], [11].
This paper focuses on classiﬁcation in urban street scenes
which has increased in interest with autonomous motor
vehicles requiring persistent operation in a large variety of
environments and lighting conditions [13]. Bileschi et al. and
Geigeretal. [14], [15] investigated urban scene classiﬁcation
but focussed on a very limited set of classes. Geometry con-
straints such as ground planes and speciﬁcation of horizontal
and vertical surfaces have enabled large improvements in
classiﬁcation such as in [16], [10].
Temporal coherence across images was implemented by
Tighe and Lazebnik demonstrating impressive results over a
very large dataset [11]. However, under signiﬁcant lighting
variation, classiﬁcation failures tend to increase. Another
method employing temporal coherence was demonstrated by
Sengupta et al. where multiple views were fused together to
form a global overhead image [17]. Our work would beneﬁt
from both these techniques but the focus of this paper is to
improve individual frame classiﬁcation before any temporal
coherence is enforced.
Another form of employing consistency across frames is
to use geometrical coherence [18], [19]. Sengupta et al.
and He et al. projected semantic labels into a 3D point
cloud computed from stereo geometry [18], [19]. Enforcing
3D consistency across semantic labels allows for increased
robustness from individual frame classiﬁcation noise but can
still suffer from varying lighting conditions.
In all the above cases, large lighting variation, such as
shadows, reduce the reliability of classiﬁcation from im-
age to image. The computer vision community have ex-
plored shadow detection and removal in images by learning
classiﬁers based on intensity and colour cues [20], [21].
Within robotics, Park and Lim [22] detected shadows cast
on the road by vehicles and surrounding structure but do
not consider shadows from natural objects in the scene.
Corke et al. investigated localisation using Finlayson et al.’s
lighting invariant transform and showed preliminary results
for classiﬁcation robustness [23], [24]. Our work is inspired
by this research where we focus on increasing the robustness
of classiﬁcation by introducing a similar lighting invariant
transform as an input to our classiﬁcation pipeline.
III. SEMANTIC SEGMENTATION
We adopt the classiﬁcation method of Tighe and Lazebnik
[10] in which RGB images are used for obtaining can-
didate scene-level matches using global image descriptors.
Superpixel-level matching between each of the candidate
images is subsequently performed. Class labels are then
transferred from the most closely matched superpixel pro-
viding a dense classiﬁcation for each image. These labels
are reﬁned using Markov Random Field optimisation to
take into account the pixel-wise neighbourhood information.
We give some details of Tighe and Lazebnik’s method
here for completeness and to highlight how our method
takes advantage of the separate global descriptor and local
superpixel matching steps.
A. Scene-Level Image Matching
Data-driven methods commonly begin by obtaining a
small set of candidate images (known as the “retrieval set”)
from a database that most closely match the current query
image. This ensures that scene-level context is maintained
for subsequent local superpixel matching. To ﬁnd a retrieval
set that best represents the query image, we use three types
of global image features: 1. spatial pyramid [25]; 2. gist
[26], and 3. colour histogram. Each feature is of the same
dimensionality as in [10].
The database images are then ranked according to their
similarity score for each feature. The highest rank from
the three scores is then assigned to that image. In the
work presented in this paper, we take a relatively small set
(between 5 and 30) of the top-ranked images from a database
of 40 (See Fig. 2 for an example retrieval set). The size
of the retrieval set and database is signiﬁcantly less than
what is normally considered useful in data transfer problems.
However, we have previously shown successful results using
these smaller datasets [19] and posit that due to the high
similarity of the data (relative to the image diversity seen
in most data transfer applications), the number of images
is sufﬁcient for the problem. As more diversity is required,
the database can be updated accordingly without the need to
relearn a parametric model.
B. Superpixel Feature Matching
Superpixels are computed using mean shift [27] and then a
variety of descriptors are used to represent each superpixel,
including relative position of the superpixels in an image,
SIFT [28], Texton histograms [29], colour histograms, and
gist [26]. Features for each of the superpixels in the train-
ing database are computed and stored with the class label
(obtained from hand-labelling).
1713
Fig. 2. An example of a typical query image from the Oxford dataset (left
image). Right images: The three top ranked images in the retrieval set for
the left query image. Note the similarity between the images which ensures
that context is maintained for the lower level superpixel feature matching.
1) Lighting Invariance: We divert from Tighe and Lazeb-
nik’s method at this point, not in the matching process itself
but in the data used to do the matching. Rather than using
the original RGB images to compute superpixel features, we
substitute the images for lighting invariant versions. Lighting
variation in RGB images can cause incorrect classiﬁcations
for the following reasons. Firstly, the superpixel generation
will incorrectly segment parts of the same object because of
shadows (recall that superixels are generated using the mean
shift algorithm). Secondly, because the colour of shadowy
regions is very different, the local descriptors can end up
far apart in feature space. Lighting invariant transforms can
mitigate some of these issues, by providing a more accurate
segmentation based on the true colour of the scene (see Fig.
1 for example).
Methods that exploit the log-ratio of photodetector re-
sponses have the advantage of being simple but also appli-
cable to a variety of lighting conditions, including sunlight
[30], [24]. We follow the approach in [2] and use a one-
dimensional feature spaceF consisting of three linear sensor
responses,fR;G;Bg, corresponding to peak sensitivities at
wavelengthsf
R
;
G
;
B
g:
F = log (G)  log (B)  (1 ) log (R) (1)
If the illumination source can be approximated by a
black-body radiator, the feature space in Eq. 1 minimises
the variance caused by scene geometry, illuminant intensity
and source spectrum, provided the parameter  satisﬁes the
following constraint [2]:
1

G
=


B
 
(1 )

R
(2)
The values forf
R
;
G
;
B
g are set to the peak spectral
response for each colour channel of the Bayer ﬁlter from the
datasheet of the image sensor.
Fig. 3. Example lighting invariant images from the Oxford dataset.
Shadows become less dominant in the images and the saliency of the
material properties in the scene are increased.
An example of the lighting invariant transform is shown
in Fig. 1 and 3. Note that the shadow effects are signiﬁcantly
reduced. Although this method is able to reduce the effect of
shadows, it can be quite sensitive if a single RGB channel is
over-exposed or under-exposed as can be seen in Eq. 1. This
can result in noisy images after the transform especially if
compression artifacts are present.
Note that while we have found lighting invariant images to
have increased beneﬁt at the superpixel matching stage, they
do not perform as well as RGB at the scene-level matching
stage. We believe that this is due to the colour histograms
providing a rich context-related feature lacking in the grey-
scale histograms from lighting invariant images.
Inclusion of the lighting invariant transform into the clas-
siﬁcation will be referred to as the LI method while the
baseline method of Tighe and Lazebnik’s will be referred
to as the RGB method throughout the rest of the paper.
C. Label Transfer
Once all the superpixel features have been computed from
the illumination-invariant images, we choose class c for
superpixel s
i
if:
P (cjs
i
)P ( cjs
i
) (3)
where  c is the set of classes not including c.
To determine the class we can use Bayes Rule and get:
P (s
i
jc)P (c)
P (s
i
)

P (s
i
j c)P ( c)
P (s
i
)
(4)
1714
After rearranging, a likelihood ratio score L(s
i
;c) for each
test superpixel and each class in the retrieval set can be
obtained:
P (s
i
jc)
P (s
i
j c)

P (c)
P ( c)
L(s
i
;c) 
P (c)
P ( c)
(5)
The likelihood ratio can then be computed as the normalised
distance between features of each superpixel in the query
image and the nearest neighbours of the superpixels in the
retrieval set. For further details, see Tighe and Lazebnik
[10]. A label for each superpixel can now be assigned by
maximising this likelihood ratio score.
Finally, this labelling is used to initialise an optimisiation
of a standard MRF energy function as in [10], [19].
IV. EXPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the proposed system, we used the pub-
licly available KITTI dataset [31] and two custom datasets
collected in Oxford over multiple kilometres and at varying
times of the day. The KITTI and one of the Oxford datasets
(with 41 and 40 database images respectively, and 10 test
images for each) were used for quantitative analysis. The
test images were hand-labelled to provide a ground truth
comparison
1
. We also qualitatively evaluate the proposed
method on the second Oxford dataset over a 750 m trajectory.
For all KITTI and Oxford images we set  = 0:48. Note
that we attempted to use the extensive CamVid dataset for
further evaluation but the sensitivity of the lighting invariant
transform to the compression artifacts present in the dataset
resulted in extremely noisy images.
Our implementation in Matlab (a modiﬁcation of the
publicly available code provided by [10]), takes approxi-
mately 30 s to classify a query image once features from
the database have been pre-computed. Most processing time
can be attributed to feature extraction and matching which
can be signiﬁcantly improved with a GPU implementation.
We directly compare the hybrid RGB and Lighting In-
variant method with Tighe and Lazebnik’s state of the art
method [10], [11] but do not include geometric or temporal
constraints. The two methods are labelled “LI” and “RGB”
respectively, in the following bar graphs.
A. Quantitative Evaluation
For semantic accuracy evaluation, we use the evaluation
measures similar to those deﬁned in [18] to compute per-
class Recall (classiﬁcation rate) (R), Average Recall (AR),
Global Recall (GR), and F 1 score deﬁned below:
R =
N
tp
N
tp
+N
fn
(6)
P =
N
tp
N
tp
+N
fp
(7)
1
Our hand-labelled images for the KITTI dataset are available athttp:
//wiki.qut.edu.au/display/cyphy/Datasets.
Fig. 4. Noise introduced by the lighting invariant transform in the KITTI
dataset. The wide ﬁeld of view results in many pixels with a single dominant
RGB channel caused by the Bayer encoding across neighbouring pixels. As
can be seen in Eq. 1, relatively small or large values in any channel will be
ampliﬁed in the resultant transform.
AR =
1
jcj
X
c
R
c
(8)
GR =
P
c
N
tp
P
c
(N
tp
+N
fn
)
(9)
F 1 = 2
PR
P +R
(10)
wherejcj is the total number of classes, R
c
is the recall
for class c, N
tp
, N
fp
, and N
fn
refer to the number of true
positive, false positive, and false negative pixels respectively.
The Global Recall evaluates the overall ratio of correct
labelling, the Average Recall evaluates the average per-class
recall score, and the F1 score is a measure of the per class
accuracy.
1) KITTI Dataset: We evaluate our method on images
obtained from the KITTI datasets [31]. The images include
common objects such as pedestrians, bicyclists, cars, trees,
and buildings at a resolution of 1242 375. We manually
annotated 51 images from different KITTI datasets to ensure
a diverse set of scenes. We label the scene into 7 seman-
tic classes, i.e., Building, Car, Sky, Tree, Sidewalk, Road,
VegetationMisc. These datasets are quite challenging, and
even objects of the same class in the scene have different
appearance.
One of the main drawbacks of the KITTI images are the
artifacts introduced through Bayer encoding over a very wide
ﬁeld of view. The lighting invariant transform is severely
effected by these artifacts resulting in noisy greyscale images
(see Fig. 4). Despite the noisy lighting invariant transform,
classiﬁcation remained robust to shadows while RGB images
alone suffered from incorrect classiﬁcation. In particular,
areas with signiﬁcant shadows were greatly effected as can
be seen in Fig. 5.
Fig. 6 compares the F1 score (top) and recall (bottom)
for each of the classes, illustrating the robustness of the
lighting invariance transform for superpixel matching. The
only signiﬁcant failure is with sidewalks and as can be seen
in Fig. 4. The noise introduced by the artifacts in the KITTI
1715
Fig. 5. Comparison between RGB (top two images) and LI (bottom two
images) classiﬁcation in the presence of signiﬁcant shadows. The LI method
is signiﬁcantly more robust to these types of scenarios than the RGB method.
dataset blur the spatial and feature-space boundaries between
sidewalks and roads. It can also be seen that the LI Recall
for cars does not perform as well as the RGB method. This is
most likely due to the noise introduced by high reﬂectivity of
the cars and the resultant saturated pixels. Note though that
the LI F1 score for cars slightly outperforms that of RGB
where this score also includes Precision in the evaluation.
2) Oxford Dataset: The second quantitative analysis is
performed on the custom Oxford dataset. The images con-
tain urban scenes with signiﬁcantly more vegetation than
exhibited in the KITTI images. The resolution of the images
are 512 384. Example images from the dataset are shown
in Fig. 7. Due to the narrower ﬁeld of view, the lighting
invariant transform results in less noise than the KITTI
images (Fig. 1) and as a result, a cleaner classiﬁcation.
Figure 8 illustrates signiﬁcant improvements for the F1
score (top) and recall (bottom) across most of the classes
than that of RGB alone. Note that the building class has
very low recall in both instances due to the small number of
buildings in the database.
Table I shows the average/global recall for the two
datasets. The addition of lighting invariant transforms at the
local level outperform or equal RGB alone.
We wish to emphasise that although the improvements
may seem modest, this is due to the fact that not all images
Building Sky Car Road Sidewalk Tree VegetationMisc
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
 
 
RGB
LI
Building Sky Car Road Sidewalk Tree VegetationMisc
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
 
RGB
LI
Fig. 6. Top plot: F1 score for the KITTI dataset. Bottom plot: Recall for
the KITTI dataset. Blue and red bars refer to the per-class F1 score and
Recall for the RGB and LI method respectively. The LI method, generally
outperforms the baseline system in all categories, except sidewalks and cars.
This is likely due to the noise introduced in the LI transformation, which
blurs the boundaries between road and sidewalk and also can exhibit high
noise around high reﬂectivity from the metal surfaces of a car.
Fig. 7. Example images from the Oxford dataset. Shadows from over-
hanging and nearby foliage is a major cause of failure for the baseline
RGB classiﬁcation method.
exhibit large lighting variation. As we are interested in
developing techniques for autonomous road vehicles, han-
dling these edge cases (e.g., misclassiﬁcation due to extreme
lighting changes) must be addressed.
3) 750m Oxford Dataset: Figure 9 shows a few examples
from the 750 m dataset
2
. There were a number of cases where
shadows severely effected the baseline RGB classiﬁcation
method whereas the LI classiﬁcation proved more reliable
in these areas. The bottom row shows a failure case for
both the RGB and LI methods and we attribute this to the
lack of training examples with signs in the scene. We also
have noticed failure cases for the LI method when pixels are
2
The accompanying video qualitatively compares the classiﬁcation tech-
niques over the entire sequence of images for the trajectory
1716
Building Sky Car Road Tree VegetationMisc
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
 
RGB
LI
Building Sky Car Road Tree VegetationMisc
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
 
 
RGB
LI
Fig. 8. Top plot: F1 score for the Oxford dataset. Bottom plot: Recall for
the Oxford dataset. Blue and red bars refer to the per-class F1 score and
Recall for the RGB and LI method respectively. The LI method, generally
outperforms the baseline system in all categories, except buildings where
both methods performed poorly. This is most likely due to the lack of
buildings in the database.
TABLE I
GLOBAL AND AVERAGE RECALL FOR THE RGB AND LI METHODS.
Method KITTI Oxford
Global Recall
RGB 0.60 0.62
LI 0.63 0.67
Average Recall
RGB 0.60 0.53
LI 0.61 0.53
saturated in one of the colour channels resulting in signiﬁcant
texture change in the LI transform.
As classiﬁcation methods push accuracy higher, it is
sometimes difﬁcult to evaluate when only 1-2% improvement
is observed overall. It is therefore important to consider gross
individual failures which would be detrimental to a persistent
autonomous system. Two of these cases are highlighted in the
top two rows of Figure 9. Although these are only “corner-
cases”, they signiﬁcantly reduce the mean time to failure for
a robotic vehicle.
These results point to the advantage of using alternate in-
puts to classiﬁcation routines while ensuring we maintain the
advantages of the the RGB methods developed throughout
the community.
V. DISCUSSION
The use of lighting invariant transforms in classiﬁcation
problems shows much promise in increasing reliability under
heavy shadows as shown in the previous results. However,
the transforms can exhibit high sensitivity to saturation of
Fig. 9. (a) Sample images from the qualitative evaluation. Classiﬁcation
results for the corresponding sample images using the (b) RGB and (c) LI
methods. The top two rows show examples where shadows severely effect
the RGB method but the LI method copes well. The bottom row illustrates
a failure case for both methods and is most likely due to the lack of similar
images in the database.
images and compression artifacts (as experienced with the
KITTI and CamVid datasets). Furthermore, objects in the
scene with similar material properties such as the sidewalk,
road, and even some buildings, can cause difﬁculties. The
particular lighting-invariant transform used in this paper does
not account for non-blackbody light sources (e.g., lights from
other cars) and thus would not be suitable when exposed to
these types of sources.
However, we demonstrate in this paper that in a number
of very difﬁcult scenarios, lighting-invariant images can be
extremely robust. We anticipate that rather than choosing
between an RGB or LI approach, that the fusion of the
two would prove beneﬁcial. Another promising approach
would be to augment RGB images with the lighting invariant
transform to produce a four-channel image and proceed with
the method outlined in this paper.
Further improvements in this technique would be to in-
crease the dataset and retrieval set sizes. As demonstrated in
the computer vision community, dataset size has a strong role
to play. Finally, temporal coherence would dramatically im-
prove results as demonstrated by Tighe and Lazebnik using
RGB alone [11]. As discussed though, any improvement at
the single image stage will always ensure increased reliability
in any extended pipeline.
VI. CONCLUSION
We present a simple extension to a state-of-the-art scene
classiﬁcation framework [10], [11] to improve robustness to
extreme lighting variation. To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst
comprehensive application of lighting-invariant transforms
to street-scene classiﬁcation. Our method outperformed the
baseline in almost all categories on two different urban
datasets. To enable long term autonomy, we believe that
1717
this is one step in the direction to increasing reliability for
scene classiﬁcation in outdoor environments over extended
timescales.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Ben Upcroft was supported by Australian Research Coun-
cil project DP110103006 Lifelong Robotic Navigation using
Visual Perception. Paul Newman and Winston Churchill were
supported by an EPSRC Leadership Fellowship, EPSRC
Grant EP/I005021/1. Authors thank Hu He for Matlab code
to help convert between formats and for evaluation. We thank
Alex Stewart and Hugo Grimmett for valuable suggestions
on this paper. The authors would also like to thank Peter
Corke for motivating this line of research in 2012.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ratnasingam and T. McGinnity, “Chromaticity space for illumi-
nant invariant recognition,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 21, 2012.
[2] S. Ratnasingam and S. Collins, “Study of the photodetector character-
istics of a camera for color constancy in natural scenes,” Journal of
the Optical Society of America, vol. 27, 2010.
[3] L. Ladicky, C. Russell, P. Kohli, and P. H. Torr, “Associative hier-
archical crfs for object class image segmentation,” in International
Conference in Computer Vision, 2009.
[4] G. Brostow, J. Shotton, J. Fauqueur, and R. Cipolla, “Segmentation and
recognition using structure from motion point clouds,” in European
Conference on Vision Conference, 2008.
[5] C. Zhang, L. Wang, , and R. Yang, “Semantic segmentation of urban
scenes using dense depth maps,” inEuropeanConferenceonComputer
Vision, 2010.
[6] P. Sturgess, K. Alahari, L. Ladicky, , and P. Torr, “Combining appear-
ance and structure from motion features for road scene understanding,”
in British Machine Vision Conference, 2009.
[7] C. Liu, J. Yuen, A. Torralba, J. Sivic, , and W. Freeman, “Sift
ﬂow: Dense correspondence across different scenes,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision, 2008.
[8] C. Liu, J. Yuen, and A. Torralba, “Nonparametric scene parsing via
label transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 33, no. 12, p. 2368, 2011.
[9] A. Torralba, R. Fergus, and W. T. Freeman, “80 million tiny images:
A large data set for nonparametric object and scene recognition.”
[10] J. Tighe and S. Lazebnik, “Superparsing: Scalable nonparametric
image parsing with superpixels,” inEuropeanConferenceonComputer
Vision, 2010.
[11] ——, “Superparsing: Scalable nonparametric image parsing with
superpixels,” in International Journal of Computer Vision, 2012.
[12] J. Hays and A. A. Efros.
[13] W. Churchill and P. Newman, “Continually improving large scale long
term visual navigation of a vehicle in dynamic urban environments,”
in Proc. IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems Conference (ITSC),
September 2012.
[14] S. Bileschi and L. Wolf, “A unifed system for object detection, texture
recognition, and context analysis based on the standard model feature
set,” in British Machine Vision Conference, 2005.
[15] A. Geiger, M. Lauer, and R. Urtasun, “A generative model for 3d
urban scene understanding from movable platforms,” in International
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011.
[16] I. Posner, M. Cummins, and P. Newman, “A generative framework
for fast urban labeling using spatial and temporal context,” Journal of
Autonomous Robots, vol. 26, p. 153.
[17] S. Sengupta, P. Sturgess, and L. L. P. Torr, “Automatic dense visual
semantic mapping from street-level imagery,” in International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012.
[18] S. Sengupta, E. Greveson, A. Shahrokni, and P. Torr, “Urban 3d
semantic modelling using stereo vision,” in International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, 2013.
[19] H. He and B. Upcroft, “Nonparametric semantic segmentation for 3d
street scenes understanding,” inInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
Robots and Systems, 2013.
[20] J. Zhu, K. Samuel, S. Masood, and M. Tappen, “Learning to rec-
ognize shadows in monochromatic natural images,” in International
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2010.
[21] R. Guo, Q. Dai, and D. Hoiem, “Single-image shadow detection
and removal using paired regions,” in International Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2011.
[22] S. Park and S. Lim, “Fast shadow detection for urban autonomous driv-
ing applications,” in International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2009.
[23] G. Finlayson, S. Hordley, C. Lu, and M. Drew, “On the removal of
shadows from images,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and
Machine Intelligence, vol. 28, no. 1, p. 59, 2006.
[24] P. Corke, R. Paul, W. Churchill, and P. Newman, “Dealing with shad-
ows: Capturing intrinsic scene appearance for image-based outdoor
localisation,” in International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 2013.
[25] S. Lazebnik, C. Schmid, and J. Ponce, “Beyond bags of features:
Spatial pyramid matching for recognizing natural scene categories,”
in International Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, 2006.
[26] A. Oliva and A. Torralba, “Building the gist of a scene: The role of
global image features in recognition,” Visual Perception, Progress in
Brain Research, vol. 155, 2006.
[27] L. H. K. Fukunaga, “The estimation of the gradient of a density
function, with applications in pattern recognition,” vol. 21, no. 1, p. 32.
[28] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key-
points,” International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 60, no. 2, pp.
91–110, 2004.
[29] J. Malik, S. Belongie, T. Leung, and J. Shi, “Contour and texture
analysis for image segmentation,” International Journal of Computer
Vision, vol. 43, no. 1, p. 7, 2001.
[30] G. D. Finlayson and M. S. Drew, “4-sensor camera calibration for
image representation invariant to shading, shadows, lighting, and
specularities,” in IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision,
2001.
[31] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
The kitti dataset,” International Journal of Robotics Research (IJRR),
2013.
1718
