Automated Microrobotic Characterization of Cell-Cell Communication
J. Liu
1
, V. Siragam
2
, Z. Gong
1
, J. Chen
1
, C. Leung
1
, Z. Lu
1
, C.H. Ru
1
, S.R. Xie
1
, J. Luo
1
,
R. Hamilton
2
, and Y. Sun
1
Abstract—Most mammalian cells (e.g., cancer cells and
cardiomyocytes) adhere to a culturing surface. Compared to
robotic injection of suspended cells (e.g., embryos and oocytes),
fewerattemptsweremadetoautomatetheinjectionofadherent
cells due to their smaller size, highly irregular morphology,
small thickness (a few micrometers thick), and large variations
in thickness across cells. This paper presents a recently devel-
oped robotic system for automated microinjection of adherent
cells. The system is embedded with several new capabilities:
automatically locating micropipette tips; robustly detecting the
contact of micropipette tip with cell culturing surface and
directly with cell membrane; and precisely compensating for
accumulative positioning errors. These new capabilities make
it practical to perform adherent cell microinjection truly via
computer mouse clicking in front of a computer monitor, on
hundreds and thousands of cells per experiment (vs. a few to
tens of cells as state-of-the-art). System operation speed, success
rate, and cell viability rate were quantitatively evaluated based
on robotic microinjection of over 4,000 cells. This paper also
reports the use of the new robotic system to perform cell-
cell communication studies using large sample sizes. The gap
junction function in a cardiac muscle cell line (HL-1 cells), for
the ﬁrst time, was quantiﬁed with the system.
I. INTRODUCTION
Intercellular communication is a critical part of cellular
activities and coordinates cell function [1]. Disorders of
intercellularcommunicationareresponsiblefordiseasessuch
as cancer [2], autoimmunity [3], and diabetes [4]. A stan-
dard technique for measuring intercellular communication
is based on monitoring transfer of ﬂuorescent molecules
from an individual cell to adjacent cells through functional
gap junctions (see Fig. 1). The quantitative measurement of
dye transfer requires injection of ﬂuorescent molecules into
single cells. In present gap junction testing experiments, only
a few or tens of cells can be injected due to the limitations
of manual operation, posing a practical hurdle in attaining
statistically signiﬁcant data, for instance, for testing drug
molecules on the alteration of gap junction function.
Manually manipulating single cells is tedious and time
consuming and has high skill requirements. In manual oper-
ation, a skilled operator looks through the eyepieces of a mi-
croscopewhiledexterouslycontrollingmultipledevices(e.g.,
micromanipulators, pump, microscope stage etc.). Robotic
cell manipulation technologies progressed signiﬁcantly over
the past decade. The vast majority of demonstrated robotic
1
Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University
of Toronto, 5 King’s College Road, Toronto, ON M5S 3G8, Canada.
sun@mie.utoronto.ca
2
Division of Cardiology, The Hospital for Sick Children,
555 University Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada.
robert.hamilton@sickkids.ca
10 ?m
cell membrane
gap junction
Fig. 1. Adherent cells (HL-1) under 20. Inset shows the schematic of a
gap junction for cell-cell communication.
systems focused on the injection of suspended cells (i.e.,
oocytesandembryos)[5],[6],[7].Fewerattemptsweremade
to automate the injection of adherent cells.
Most mammalian cells (e.g., cancer cells and cardiomy-
ocytes) adhere to a culturing surface. Different from large
suspend cells (e.g., mouse oocytes100 mm; zebraﬁsh em-
bryos1 mm), adherent cells are smaller in size and highly
irregular in morphology (vs. spherical for oocytes/embryos),
making robust pattern recognition difﬁcult and automation
challenging. Additionally, adherent cells are only a few
micrometers thick and vary signiﬁcantly in thickness, posing
more stringent requirements in robotic positioning.
A few joystick-based systems were demonstrated to assist
operators for adherent cell microinjection [8], [9]. Long
training, low success rates, and poor reproducibility make
these systems incapable of injecting more than tens of cells
per experiment. For example, the most popular commercial
system for adherent cell injection is Eppendorf’s InjectMan
system that requires an operator to look into the eyepieces
of a microscope and perform microinjection by controlling
joysticks. The injection success rate and cell survival rate
of the system are 49.2% and 49.72%, respectively [8]. The
only other joystick-based adherent cell injection system was
demonstrated for the injection of ﬂuorescent molecules into
adherent cell lines with a 49% injection success rate [9]. Due
to the difﬁculty of operating joysticks for ﬁne positioning
control, this system does not permit the injection of a high
number of cells (only 82 cells injected).
In our previous work in developing robotics technologies
for injecting adherent cells [10], we attempted to trans-
form joystick-based operation to computer mouse clicking.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 469
However, several practical limitations in the system required
the operator to manually perform a few key steps using
joysticks and looking into the eyepieces of the microscope.
This hybrid way of system operation (mouse clicking in
front of a computer monitor; and operating joysticks under
microscope) precluded the system’s potential for routine use
in biology labs.
Firstly, the system lacked the critical capability for auto-
matically locating a micropipette tip. In adherent cell injec-
tion, the micropipette tip must be kept within a few hundreds
of nanometers to ensure a high cell viability. Locating the
tip under optical microscopy requires high skills and extreme
care since tip breakage can easily occur. Additionally, the
small tip often gets clogged by large molecules or cell
debris, necessitating regular replacement of micropipette tips
(e.g., every 100 cells), demanding the system to possess the
capability for locating micropipette tip automatically.
The second limitation in our previous system was the
limited contact detection capability. In the culturing of
adherent cells, cells are more commonly cultured on gels
or protein-coated (e.g., collagen) surfaces. Our previously
reported contact detection algorithm works well on a bare
culturing surface but has a low success rate on these coated
surfaces. Furthermore, the previous contact detection algo-
rithm is not applicable when cell conﬂuency (i.e., density) is
high (>80%). Thirdly, our previous system was not able to
compensate for accumulated positioning errors, which made
the system unable to inject more than 100 cells.
In this work, we present a new robotic system capable
of injecting thousands of adherent cells. The system suc-
cessfully addresses the limitations of our previous system
prototype [10] and has the following new capabilities: au-
tomatically locating micropipette tips; robustly detecting the
contact of micropipette tip with cell culturing surface and
directly with cell membrane; and precisely compensating
for accumulative positioning errors. These new capabilities,
for the ﬁrst time, make it practical to perform adherent cell
microinjection truly via computer mouse clicking in front
of a computer monitor, making the robotic system suitable
for routine use in biology. We also demonstrate the use of
the new robotic system to perform cell-cell communication
studies using large sample sizes (over 1,000 cells vs. a few
to tens of cells as state-of-the-art). Finally, the gap junction
function in a cardiac muscle cell line (HL-1 cells), for the
ﬁrst time, was quantiﬁed with the new robotic system.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
This system uses well calibrated air pressure to deliver
aqueous solution into either the cytoplasm or nucleus of a
cell. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the system consists of a
standard inverted microscope (Nikon TE2000-S, Nikon Mi-
croscopes)andamotorizedX-Ytranslationalstage(ProScan,
Prior Scientiﬁc, Inc.). The X-Y stage has a travel range
of 75 mm along both axes with a resolution of 0.01 mm,
a maximum speed of 5 mm/s, and a repeatability of 1
mm. A CMOS camera (acA1300-32gm, Basler) is connect
to the microscope for visual feedback. A glass capillary,
(c)
X-Y stage
4-DOF robot
microscope
camera
user interface
(a)
micropipette
adherent 
cells
(b)
Fig.2. (a)&(b)Roboticadherentcellinjection(RACI)system.(c)Electron
microscopy image of micropipette tip.
laser pulled to have an outer diameter of 500 nm and inner
diameter of 300 nm [Fig. 2(c)], is mounted to a 4 degrees-
of-freedom (DOF) DC-driven micromanipulator (MX7600,
Siskiyou, Inc.) that has a travel range of 20 mm and a 0.1
mm positioning resolution along each axis. A host computer
executing computer vision microscopy and motion control
algorithms controls all hardware.
The robotic micromanipulator and X-Y stage are cooper-
atively controlled for positioning the micropipette along the
XYZ axes and positioning cells in the XY plane. The overall
control architecture of the system is summarized in Fig. 3.
Microscopy visual feedback is used for providing position
feedback to position the micromanipulator and X-Y stage,
forming an image-based visual servo control system.
Whenamicropipetteismountedonthesystem,thesystem
detects the micropipette tip’s position and automatically
moves it to the center of the ﬁeld of view (FOV) [see Section
III-A]. The system is capable of contact detection in two
modes, either on cell culturing surface or directly on cell
membrane [see Section III-B&C], to determine the relative
vertical distance between the micropipette tip and the cells in
the Z direction. After the injection location (inside cytoplasm
or nucleus) on each cell is selected via computer mouse
470
micropipette tip position
4 DOF robotic 
manipulator
micropipette
camera
PID
adherent cell position
PID
X-Y stage adherent cells
X
d
visual feedback
C
d
_
+
_
+
visual feedback
encoder
_ +
Fig. 3. System control architecture.
clicking, the system controls the micropipette to deliver a
precise volume into each cell, and completes the injection of
all selected cells following a shortest path. The system then
controls the X-Y translational stage to bring cells in the next
ﬁeld of view under microscopy imaging for injection.
III. KEY METHODS
A. Locating Micropipette Tip
When a micropipette tip is mounted on the microma-
nipulator, the system automatically locates the micropipette
tip and moves it to the center of the ﬁeld of view. This
process involves two main steps: micropipette detection and
autofocus adjustment.
In the detection step, the micropipette is swept in the X-Y
plane for detecting its presence in the ﬁeld of view. In some
cases, the micropipette tip cannot be detected when it is far
away from the focal plane. When this occurs, the system
moves the focal plane up by controlling the focus adjustment
motor,andtheX-Ysweepisthenrepeated.Duringthesweep
of the micropipette, motion history images are generated
and used for detecting the presence of the micropipette. The
motion history image method is discussed in Section III-C.
In the autofocus step, the system uses the normalized
variance method [11] to calculate the focus measure. The
autofocus step consists of coarse and ﬁne focus adjustments.
Coarsefocusadjustmentmovesthefocalplaneinalargestep
sizeuntiltheentireimageproducesamaximalfocusmeasure
value. In ﬁne focus adjustment, a recursive quad-tree autofo-
cusingmethodisusedtoaccuratelyfocusonthemicropipette
tip with smaller step sizes. After the focus adjustments, the
in-focus micropipette tip is moved to the center of the ﬁeld
of view through closed-loop visual servoing under a low
magniﬁcation objective and then under a high magniﬁcation
objective. The detailed methods for detecting and tracking
micropipette tips are described in [12].
B. Contact Detection on Culturing Surface
In order to inject materials into a cell, the relative vertical
distance between the micropipette tip and the cell along the
Z-direction must be accurately detected. Without the inclu-
sion of an extra sensor (e.g., tactile or force sensors), which
increases hardware complexity, two modes of computer
vision-based contact detection algorithms are developed to
accurately determine the relative heights of the micropipette
tip and adherent cells. This section describes the ﬁrst mode,
inwhichthesystemdetectstheinitialcontactofmicropipette
tip on the cell culturing surface that is protein coated (vs.
bare surface).
1) Empty Region Detection: When cell conﬂuency is
lower than 80%, empty areas on the culturing surface [see
Fig. 4(a)] can be detected and used for contact detection. The
system divides the ﬁeld of view into sub-regions, the size of
which is 100 pixels100 pixels. The normalized variance of
the pixel value, F, is calculated for each region to represent
its smoothness, according to
F =
1
WHm
å
W
å
H
(I(x;y) m)
2
(1)
where W and H are the region width and height, I(x;y) is
the pixel intensity at the point (x;y), and m is the average
region intensity. This algorithm effectively compensates for
differences in average intensity among different regions. The
region with the lowest variance value is considered empty
and used for performing contact detection.
2) Contact Detection via Three-Dimensional Motion:
The system moves the detected empty region in the X-Y
plane until it is directly under the micropipette tip. The
micropipette tip is lowered by the micromanipulator along
the Z direction. When the micropipette tip contacts the bare
surface of a Petri dish, further vertical movement of the
micropipette tip induces horizontal motion [13]. However, in
cellculturing,thePetridishsurfaceisusuallycoatedwithgel
or protein (e.g., collagen). The coating makes it difﬁcult for
the micropipette tip to ‘slide’ horizontally (it ‘stabs’ directly
into the coated layer). Therefore, in our new system, the X-Y
stage is also servoed simultaneously when the micropipette
tip is lowered by the micromanipulator. The X-Y stage’s
motion enables the reliable generation of the pipette tip’s
horizontal ‘sliding’ motion. This results in highly reliable
contact detection on protein-coated culturing surfaces.
C. Detection of Contact on Cell Surface
When cell conﬂuency is high, empty regions on the
culturing surface becomes unavailable; hence, the system
performs contact detection by detecting direct contact of the
micropipette tip on the cell surface [see Fig. 4(b)]. After
the operator selects a cell via computer mouse clicking, the
system moves the cell to the micropipette tip position in the
X-Y plane and then moves the micropipette tip downwards
along the Z axis. When the micropipette tip contacts the cell
surface, the cell is deformed and a subtle motion appears
around the contact point. To detect this subtle motion, we de-
velopedanalgorithmbasedonmotionhistoryimages(MHI).
The MHI-based method enhances motion representation by
accumulating cell deformation over a period of time.
In MHI detection, a region of interest (ROI) is extracted
around the micropipette tip [see Fig. 4(c)]. Within the ROI,
a mask is applied on top of the micropipette to remove the
motion of the micropipette tip [Fig. 4(d)]. When the cell is
deformed, a silhouette image is obtained by subtracting two
consecutive frames. The silhouette image is then binarized to
suppress background noise. When the micropipette continues
471
Fig. 4. Contact detection in two modes. (a) When cell conﬂuency is low,
the system detects contact of the micropipette tip on the culturing surface.
(b) At high cell conﬂuency, the system detects direct contact of the pipette
tip on the cell surface. (c) ROI image shows cell being deformed: white dot
indicatestipposition.(d)ModiﬁedROIremovingthemotionofmicropipette
tip. (e) Motion history image showing the deformation of cell: red arrows
indicate motion gradients.
to move downwards, new silhouettes of cell deformation
are extracted and overlaid to the old silhouette that fades
over time. The sequentially fading silhouettes record the
motion history of cell’s deformation. The MHI, H
t
(x;y;t),
is computed according to
H
t
(x;y;t)
=
{
t if Y(x;y;t)=1
max(0; H
t
(x;y;t 1) g) otherwise
(2)
where, (x;y) and t represent position and time, the duration
t determines the temporal extent of the movement, g is the
decay parameter, and Y(x;y;t) is the binarized image at t.
With the MHI-based algorithm, the subtle deforming motion
is greatly enhanced by adding the motion history information
[see Fig. 4(e)].
The sum of pixel values in MHI, s(H), is calculated
as a measure to determine the contact of cell surface. If
s(H) is above a threshold value (d), the micropipette tip
is considered as contacting cell top surface. The threshold d
is calculated dynamically by analyzing MHIs in which the
micropipette tip has not contacted cell surface.
d = ¯ s+as(s) (3)
where ¯ s is the average of pixel value sum of the MHIs in
which no contact occurs, s(s) is the standard deviation, and
a is a preset parameter which determines the threshold value.
By adding serval times of standard deviations (i.e., as(s))
to the mean value, the threshold is able to reject most of the
MHIs that do not have cell deformation. Accordingly, false
positive detections caused by random noise and the motion
of micropipette tip are effectively reduced.
D. Robotic Microinjection
Inthisnewroboticsystem,anoperatorperformseverystep
throughout the microinjection process via computer mouse
10 ?m
Fig. 5. Robotic injection of adherent cells. When the micropipette is
inserted into the cell, material deposition triggered by pressure pulses results
in a “shock wave” motion inside the cell.
clicking. The operator readily selects injection locations
(i.e., cell nucleus or cytoplasm) since the cell nucleus and
cytoplasm are distinct on a computer monitor. The operator
can select a single cell or multiple cells to inject within the
ﬁeldofview.Duringcomputermouseclicking,celltemplates
centered at the mouse clicking positions are extracted. The
templates are used for template matching to provide position
feedback. After performing contact detection, the system
moves the micropipette tip close to the ﬁrst target cell and
inserts the micropipette into the target cell along the tilting
axis at the maximal speed. The pressure source is then
triggeredtoapplyapositivepressuretodepositthepreloaded
material into the cell. Material deposition results in a “shock
wave” motion inside the cell, around the injection location
(Fig. 5). The volume of injected materials is precisely
controlled by the injection pressure magnitude and width.
Although target cells are selected in a random order by the
operator, the system injects all cells along the shortest path.
The system then moves to the next ﬁeld of view to continue
the injection of more cells. The locations of injected cells are
all recorded by the system, permitting time-lapsed imaging
of every injected cell.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Performance of Locating Micropipette Tip
To evaluate the system’s performance of automatically
locating micropipette, micropipette tip’s initial distance to
the culturing surface was divided into ﬁve groups. The
task of locating micropipette tips in the ﬁve groups was
also conducted manually by three skilled micromanipulation
operators. Experimental results demonstrate that the overall
time for auto-locating micropipette tip (30.2s in average)
is signiﬁcantly shorter (p-value< 0:001) than in manual
operation (averagely 64.8s). Auto-locating micropipette tip
was also tested under three imaging modes: bright ﬁeld,
phase contrast, and differential interference contrast (DIC).
Although the phase contrast or DIC imaging modes are
desired for producing pseudo-3D view of cells, it was found
in experiments that bright ﬁeld imaging produced a high
success rate because the micropipette tip appears more
uniform and “halo” free under bight ﬁeld imaging.
B. Injection Speed
Injection speed of the system was evaluated by injecting
three different adherent cell lines: HeLa cells, HEK293 cells,
472
TABLE I
ROBOTIC MICROINJECTION SPEED OF THREE DIFFERENT CELL LINES
cell line HeLa HEK293 HL-1 overall
injection number 2281 1068 1116 4465
injection time (min) 97 48 52 197
speed (cells/min) 23.5 22.3 21.5 22.7
TABLE II
INJECTION SUCCESS RATE AND CELL SURVIVAL RATE AFTER INJECTION
injection location injection number success rate survival rate
into cytoplasm 1245 95.2% 97.2%
into nucleus 1036 97.5% 96.5%
and HL-1 cells. The number of injected cells and time
consumed are summarized in Table I. The injection time in
Table I is the total experimental time for all steps including
locating micropipette tip, contact detection, cell selection
and injection. The results from the injection of over 4,000
cells show that the injection speed of the robotic system is
consistent across different adherent cell lines. The average
injection speed is 22.7 cells/min.
C. Injection Success Rate and Cell Survival Rate
The system injected an HPTS ﬂuorescent dye into the
cytoplasm or nucleus of HeLa cells. The HPTS dye was
chosen because it is highly water-soluble and membrane-
impermeable. Therefore, only the cells that are successfully
injected with HPTS are able to reveal ﬂuorescent signals.
Those cells revealing strong green ﬂuorescent signals were
considered as successfully injected. Experimental results
summarized in Table II show that the success rates for
cytoplasmic (n=1,245) and nuclear (n=1,036) injection were
comparable (95.2% and 97.5%).
Cell post-injection viability was evaluated by using a cell
viability assay kit (Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit, Life Tech-
nologies). The measured cell survival rate after cytoplasmic
injection was 97.2% and after nuclear injection was 96.5%.
D. Characterization of Cell-Cell Communication
We used the robotic system to measure gap junction
function. In the dye transfer experiments, the membrane-
impermeable HPTS dye mixing with Dextran-Rhodamine
red dye was injected into a cell. The small ﬂuorescent
HPTS molecule (MW=524.37Da) can be transferred from
the injected cell to adjacent cells through gap junctions. In
contrast, the Dextran-Rhodamine molecule, because of its
large molecule size (MW=10,000Da), cannot pass through
gap junctions. Therefore, only the injected cell reveal a red
ﬂuorescent signal, while the injected cell as well as a number
of adjacent cells reveal green ﬂuorescent signal [see Fig.
6]. The exact number of neighboring cells that can reveal
green ﬂuorescent signal is determined by the capability of
the cells’ gap junctions. Thus, intercellular gap junction
communication (GJC) was quantitatively investigated by
measuring the dye transferred cell number (i.e., the number
of cells uptaking ﬂuorescent molecules from the injected cell
10 ?m
injected cell
Fig. 6. Only one cell is injected, and ﬂuorescence dye is transferred
from the injected cell to adjacent cells through intercellular gap junction
communication (GJC).
through gap junctions) and dye transferred distance (i.e., the
furthest distance that the ﬂuorescent dye can be transferred).
Gap junction communication was investigated on two
different cell lines (i.e., Hela cells, and HL-1 cells). We used
18-a glycyrrhetinic acid (18-aGA) to treat the cells which
is known to inhibit the role of GJC in ﬁbroblast growth [14],
myoblast fusion [15], and trophoblast proliferation [16]. In
our experiments, the robotic system was used to assess GJC
of three experiment groups with different doses (25, 50, or
100mM)of18-aGAtreatment.Twocontrolgroupswerealso
included. Control group 1 (control 1 in Fig. 7(a)) had no 18-
aGA. Since the 18-aGA stocking solution was dissolved in
DMSO, a second control group (control 2) with only DMSO
treatment was also examined.
The experimental data in Fig. 7(a) shows that there is no
signiﬁcant difference between the two control groups. The
number of adjacent cells uptaking ﬂuorescent dye from the
injected cells decreased signiﬁcantly with a higher dose of
GJC inhibitor. The results show that 100 mM of 18-aGA
effectively blocked almost all the gap junctions for both cell
lines.OnecanalsoseethatHL-1cellshavemuchhigherGJC
than Hela cells. HL-1 cell is a cardiac muscle cell line. The
strongGJCofHL-1cellsisnecessaryinimpulsepropagation
incardiactissue[17].Theimpulsesignalispassedefﬁciently
through gap junctions, allowing the cardiac tissue to contract
at the same tandem. In contrast, Hela cells, a cancer cell
line derived from cervical cancer cells, express little GJC,
conﬁrming they do not pass signals via gap junctions for
cell coordination. Limited GJC results in poor inhibition of
cancer cell mitosis, causing tumor formation [18].
Dye transfer distance was measured, for the ﬁrst time, for
HL-1 cells. Fig. 7(b) shows that a higher dose of 18-aGA in-
hibitor resulted in signiﬁcantly shorter dye transfer distances.
E. Discussion
Microinjection of adherent cells permits the direct inser-
tion of foreign materials (e.g., DNA/RNA, ﬂuorescent dyes,
quantum dots etc.) into single cells. It is a decades old
technology that is still widely used in cell biology for testing
cell-cell communication, studying intracellular behavior, and
473
      
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
# of cells uptaking dye
 
 
HL-1 cell
Hela cell
0 50 100 150
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
dye transfer distance (mm)
cell count #
 
 
100 mM
50 mM
control 1
control 1 
(n=664)
control 2
(n=653)
25 ?M
(n=678)
50 ?M
(n=682)
100 ?M
(n=673)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7. Results of dye transfer experiments. (a) The number of cells
uptaking ﬂuorescence dye from the injected cells. (b) Histogram of dye
transfer distance for HL-1 cells.
gene transfection [19].
Manual microinjection of adherent cells and existing
robotic system prototypes are limited to the injection of a
few to tens of cells per experiment at best. Our new robotic
system described in this paper is the ﬁrst system capable
of performing microinjection on hundreds and thousands of
cells per experiment. The system is embedded with strong
automation capabilities in every step of operation, enabling
an operator to perform the entire microinjection process via
computer mouse clicking in front of a computer monitor.
Trainingofauserwithnoskillsinmicroinjectiontakes10-15
minutes, and after a few hours’ operation, the user becomes
highly proﬁcient at operating the system to perform adherent
cell microinjection with high success rates.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper described a robotic adherent cell injection
system equipped with several key technologies that were
recently developed. These new techniques include automati-
callylocatingmicropipettetips,robustlydetectingthecontact
of micropipette tip with cell culturing surface and directly
with cell membrane, and precisely compensating for accu-
mulative positioning errors. The high degree of automation
of the system enables users with no microinjection training
to perform large-scale cell injection with high success rates.
System operation speed, success rate, and cell viability rate
were quantitatively evaluated. Dye transfer experiments were
conductedondifferentcelllinestoestablishapowerfulassay
for characterizing cell gap junction functions.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Pawson, “Protein modules and signalling networks.” Nature, vol.
373, no. 6515, pp. 573–80, Feb. 1995.
[2] P. Friedl and K. Wolf, “Tumour-cell invasion and migration: diversity
and escape mechanisms.” Nat. Rev. Cancer, vol. 3, no. 5, pp. 362–74,
May 2003.
[3] I. Stefanov´ a, J. R. Dorfman, and R. N. Germain, “Self-recognition
promotes the foreign antigen sensitivity of naive T lymphocytes.”
Nature, vol. 420, no. 6914, pp. 429–34, Nov. 2002.
[4] K. M. Abdullah, G. Luthra, J. J. Bilski, S. A. Abdullah, L. P.
Reynolds, D. A. Redmer, and A. T. Grazul-Bilska, “Cell-to-cell
communication and expression of gap junctional proteins in human
diabetic and nondiabetic skin ﬁbroblasts: effects of basic ﬁbroblast
growth factor.” Endocrine, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 35–41, Feb. 1999.
[5] Z. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Leung, N. Esfandiari, R. F. Casper, and
Y. Sun, “Robotic ICSI (intracytoplasmic sperm injection).” IEEE
Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 2102–8, July 2011.
[6] H. B. Huang, D. Sun, S. Member, J. K. Mills, and S. H. Cheng,
“Robotic cell injection system with position and force control: toward
automatic batch biomanipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 25, no. 3,
pp. 727–737, 2009.
[7] A. Pillarisetti, S. Member, M. Pekarev, A. D. Brooks, J. P. Desai, and
A. Member, “Evaluating the effect of force feedback in cell injection,”
IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 322–331, 2007.
[8] S. Lim, N. A. Zeenathul, M. L. Mohd Azmi, O. Abas Mazni, and
O. Fauziah, “Effect of protein concentration and injection pressure in
microinjection delivery of maltose binding protein into breast cancer
cells,” Pertanika J. Sci. & Technol., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 273–283, 2011.
[9] K. Viigipuu and P. Kallio, “Microinjection of living adherent cells
by using a semi-automatic microinjection system.” Alternatives to
laboratory animals : ATLA, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 417–23, Oct. 2004.
[10] W. Wang, Y. Sun, M. Zhang, R. Anderson, L. Langille, and W. Chan,
“A system for high-speed microinjection of adherent cells.” Rev. Sci.
Instrum., vol. 79, no. 10, p. 104302, Oct. 2008.
[11] Y. Sun, S. Duthaler, and B. J. Nelson, “Autofocusing in computer
microscopy: selecting the optimal focus algorithm.” Microsc. Res.
Tech., vol. 65, no. 3, pp. 139–49, Oct. 2004.
[12] J. Liu, Z. Gong, K. Tang, Z. Lu, and Y. Sun, “Locating end-effector
tips in automated micromanipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. (Accepted
for Publication).
[13] W. Wang, X. Liu, and Y. Sun, “Contact Detection in Microrobotic
Manipulation,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 821–828, Aug.
2007.
[14] W. Martin, G. Zempel, D. H¨ ulser, and K. Willecke, “Growth
inhibition of oncogene-transformed rat ﬁbroblasts by cocultured
normal cells: relevance of metabolic cooperation mediated by gap
junctions.” Cancer Res., vol. 51, no. 19, pp. 5348–51, Oct. 1991.
[15] R. M. M` ege, D. Goudou, C. Giaume, M. Nicolet, and F. Rieger, “Is
intercellular communication via gap junctions required for myoblast
fusion?” Cell Adhes. Commun., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 329–343, Aug.
1994.
[16] T. Nishimura, C. Dunk, Y. Lu, X. Feng, a. Gellhaus, E. Winterhager,
J. Rossant, and S. J. Lye, “Gap junctions are required for trophoblast
proliferation in early human placental development.” Placenta,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 595–607, Aug. 2004.
[17] S. Rohr, “Role of gap junctions in the propagation of the cardiac
action potential.” Cardiovasc. Res., vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 309–22, May
2004.
[18] J. W. Holder, E. Elmore, and J. C. Barrett, “Gap junction function
and cancer.” Cancer Research, vol. 53, no. 15, pp. 3475–85, Aug.
1993.
[19] T. K. Kim and J. H. Eberwine, “Mammalian cell transfection: the
present and the future.” Anal. Bioanal. Chem., vol. 397, no. 8, pp.
3173–8, Aug. 2010.
474
