A Summary of Team MIT’s Approach to the Virtual Robotics Challenge
R. Tedrake, M. Fallon, S. Karumanchi, S. Kuindersma, M. Antone, T. Schneider, T. Howard, M. Walter,
H. Dai, R. Deits, M. Fleder, D. Fourie, R. Hammoud, S. Hemachandra, P. Ilardi, C. P´ erez-D’Arpino, S. Pillai,
A. Valenzuela, C. Cantu, C. Dolan, I. Evans, S. Jorgensen, J. Kristeller, J. A. Shah, K. Iagnemma, S. Teller
The attached video describes the system developed by
researchers from MIT for the Defense Advanced Research
Projects Agency’s (DARPA) Virtual Robotics Challenge
(VRC),heldinJune2013.TheVRCwastheﬁrstcompetition
in the DARPA Robotics Challenge (DRC), a program that
aims to “develop ground robotic capabilities to execute
complex tasks in dangerous, degraded, human-engineered
environments” [1]. The VRC required teams to guide a
model of Boston Dynamics’ humanoid robot, Atlas, through
driving, walking, and manipulation tasks in simulation.
Team MIT’s approach centered around teleautomation, in
which an operator provided high-level instructions to be
carried out autonomously by the robot. The resulting system
comprised a 3D user interface coupled with perception,
planning, control, and networking modules. The system’s
perception and planning abilities were assisted by the human
operator(s) as needed.
Team MIT’s user interface, the Viewer, provided the oper-
atorwithauniﬁedrepresentationofallavailableinformation.
A 3D rendering of the robot depicted its most recently
estimated body state with respect to the surrounding envi-
ronment, represented by point clouds and texture-mapped
meshes as sensed by on-board LIDAR and fused over time.
Inertial and kinematic measurements were combined to
provideaccurateestimatesoftherobot’sbodystate.Thepose
of the robot’s pelvis was estimated by freely propagating
inertial acceleration and rotation rate measurements. Joint
anglemeasurementswerecombinedwiththekinematicrobot
model to propagate special footstep representations in the
local navigational frame. Discrepancies between inertial and
kinematic estimates were used in a feedback process to
correct inertial sensor and navigational state errors.
To overcome the uplink restrictions of the VRC,
Team MIT’s networking module employed an information-
theoreticcodingalgorithmtocompressplanspriortosending
them to the robot. This encoder, based on the Goby Project
[2], allowed for compression ratios of over 30:1.
The planning and control infrastructure consisted of two
modes: manipulation and walking. The operator initiated
manipulation planning by requesting a grasp for a speciﬁed
object. A grasp optimizer then suggested an appropriate
grasplocationfortheindicatedhand.Theoperatorcouldthen
request manipulation plans to reach for, grasp, or move the
object. Requests were transmitted to a whole-body planner
that computed joint trajectories which could achieve the
manipulation goal while satisfying stability constraints. Can-
didate plans were displayed in the Viewer as a sequence of
ghosted renderings of the robot, through which the operator
could “scrub.” The operator could modify the plan before
transmitting it to the robot for autonomous execution.
The operator initiated walking planning by specifying a
navigationgoalthattriggeredthefootstepplannertocompute
a set of safe footsteps given the current estimate of the
terrain. These footsteps were displayed in the Viewer for
adjustment as needed. The walking planner then generated
a whole-body plan and computed a stabilizing controller
using a simple model of the robot. During each control step,
the controller solved a quadratic program that minimized
deviation from the desired dynamic walking plan while
respecting the instantaneous dynamic, input, and friction
constraints of the robot.
Team MIT’s system also included a set of scripted re-
covery behaviors that were designed to return the robot to
standing after a fall. If a successful recovery was deemed
unlikely, the operator could switch the robot to a dynamic
crawling mode that used a controller similar to the one used
for walking.
The combination of walking and crawling planners and
controllers allowed Team MIT to complete the course in all
VRC walking trials. Recovery behaviors were successfully
employed during the manipulation and driving tasks. The
manipulation framework readily supported operations such
as lifting a hose nozzle and turning a wall-mounted valve.
It also allowed for precision alignment operations, such as
insertingthenozzleintoastandpipe.However,theserequired
many attempts with small manual adjustments to the plan at
each step. Finally, while the system was able to synthesize a
plan for entering a vehicle, it was unable to execute this plan
successfully. Instead, in the VRC driving tasks, a scripted
jumping maneuver propelled the robot into the vehicle, but
thisresultedinbodypositionsfromwhichdrivingthevehicle
was impossible.
Team MIT placed third out of twenty-two VRC teams.
By ﬁnishing in the top six, Team MIT obtained an Atlas
robot, and is now adapting its system for the DRC Trials in
December of 2013.
REFERENCES
[1] “DARPA robotics challenge (DARPA-BAA-12-39),” Apr. 2012. [On-
line]. Available: https://www.fbo.gov/spg/ODA/DARPA/CMO/DARPA-
BAA-12-39/listing.html
[2] T. Schneider and H. Schmidt, “Goby-acomms version 2: extensible
marshalling, queuing, and link layer interfacing for acoustic
telemetry,” in 9th IFAC Conference on Manoeuvring and Control
of Marine Craft, Arenzano, Italy, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://www.stoby.us/dl/mcmc2012 goby2.pdf
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2087
