  
? 
Abstract— A two-dimensional perching model is proposed 
first for perching with quadrotors. Then a perching mechanism 
by means of grasping is designed based on the model. The 
kinematic specifications of the perching mechanism are 
optimized to maximize the force transfer ratio so that sufficient 
grasping force can be generated for reliable perching. A 
controller of the gripper based on the control strategy from 
previous development is designed for autonomous perching with 
a quadrotor. Experiments on the grasping capability and 
reliability of the mechanism and its effectiveness with the 
controller for autonomous perching are conducted. Results 
show that the perching mechanism can generate sufficient 
grasping force and achieve autonomous perching to a target 
pole with a quadrotor both effectively and reliably. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Research on perching first emerged in the field of 
ornithology ever since 19
th
 century [1][2][3][4]. With the fast 
development and vast applications of UAVs in last decade, 
perching with a UAV has become a booming topic, especially 
in the field of biomimetics. Nowadays, many disciplines are 
involved in investigations on perching, including ornithology, 
biomechanics, aerodynamics, control and mechanical design. 
Researchers in these fields have obtained fruitful results. 
Anatomy structures of birds and their principles have been 
the main topics in perching-related ornithology research. The 
concept of automatic perching mechanism (APM), consisting 
of an automatic digital flexor mechanism (ADFM) and a 
digital tendon locking mechanism (DTLM), is widely 
accepted now [5]. The ADFM is activated when birds perch. 
Their knees and ankles are bent under body weight and the 
tendon going all along the thigh to the digits is then stretched 
and the digits will be pulled to grip the perch passively [6]; 
The DTLM will latch the tendon when gripping is done to 
secure the grasp without exerting any muscular effort [7][8]. 
On the other hand, the interactions between birds and 
environments during perching was left unaddressed until 
Fisher in 1956 first investigated the interaction dynamics 
between perching pigeons and the perch by utilizing a 
mechanical force plate to measure the landing and taking off 
forces applied by pigeons’ legs [9][10]. His research provided 
a new perspective toward the biomechanics behind birds’ 
perching behaviors, which is rather valuable. Heppner and 
Anderson further designed a perch integrated with simple 
 
*Resrach collaborated with DSO, Singapore. 
Wanchao Chi, K. H. Low and K. H. Hoon are with School of Mechanical 
and Aerospace Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 
Singapore (e-mail: wchi1@e.ntu.edu.sg; mkhlow@ntu.edu.sg; 
mkhhoon@ntu.edu.sg ). 
Johnson Tang is with the Defence Science Organization, Singapore 
(e-mail: tjohnson@dso.org.sg ). 
force-sensing elements to gauge the taking off thrust exerted 
by pigeons’ legs in [11]. With strain gauges Bonser and 
Rayner implemented a novel force-transducing perch capable 
of measuring both magnitude and direction of forces in [12]. 
The thrusts exerted by legs in time domain was measured and 
studied, and the force angles were further taken into account. 
Similar methodology was also adopted by Green and Cheng in 
[13] where they specifically looked into the factor of kinetic 
energy of birds during perching. Both kinematic and dynamic 
variables, such as approaching trajectory, speed and force, 
were recorded simultaneously for analysis. The authors’ 
perspective from kinetic energy broadens the parameter scope 
involved in birds’ perching, and they also proposed some 
more parameters for future investigations. 
Since it takes a series of aerodynamic maneuvers for birds 
to perch successfully, the aerodynamic control is a hot spot in 
the field of perching with UAVs. Wickenheiser and Garcia 
studied the longitudinal dynamics of a morphing aircraft to 
achieve the capability of perching in [14]. They further 
optimized the trajectories for perching in [15]. Main efforts 
were made on aerodynamic analysis and its control strategy. 
Cory and Tedrake researched aerodynamic control for 
maneuvers at high angles-of-attack in [16]. They developed a 
particular procedure to perch a small fixed-wing glider with an 
aggressive high angle-of-attack. Roberts et al. further studied 
the controllability of fixed-wing perching with a simplified 
closed-form model [17]. Their results showed that additional 
actuations can facilitate perching with less control effort. 
Mellinger also investigated trajectory generation and control 
of quadrotors for aggressive maneuvers [18]. Perching is one 
of the potential maneuvers that they are aiming at, as their 
studies in [19]. 
Anderson et al. proposed several feasible concepts for 
perching with UAVs, and mainly studied the use of sticky 
pads in [20]. Kovac et al. designed a practical mechanism for 
gliders to perch on vertical surfaces using torsion springs and 
needles in [21]. It worked rather well even with concrete walls. 
Desbiens et al. also developed a perching mechanism that is 
able to perch a fixed-wing UAV to a vertical wall using 
micro-spines [22][23]. Their design is innovative, but it 
requires aggressive maneuvers of the UAV. Doyle et al., for 
the first time, applied bio-inspired compliant gripping and 
passive perching to a quad-rotor [24][25]. This concept is 
closer to birds’ perching in terms of biomimetics, but 
integrated perching experiments with quadrotors were not 
sufficiently addressed. Nagendran et al. proposed a leg 
concept and corresponding control strategies for UAV 
perching [26]. The leg mechanism is inspired directly from the 
typical anatomy of a bird’s leg. However, no prototype had 
been developed and evaluated. Recent work by Pu Xie et al. 
An Optimized Perching Mechanism for Autonomous Perching with a 
Quadrotor*
 
Wanchao Chi, K. H. Low, Member, IEEE, K. H. Hoon, and Johnson Tang  
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3109
  
addressed the bio-inspired control strategy of perching with a 
quadrotor based on the Tau theory [27]. Dynamics and control 
of the quadrotor were taken into account and promising 
simulation results were obtained. It’s a big step toward a 
bio-inspired perching methodology for UAVs, although 
validation with a hardware prototype is still underway.  
It can be seen that no comprehensive biomechanics model 
of birds’ perching has been established yet, though research on 
perching in ornithology have already addressed general 
fundamentals. Also, to our best knowledge, an interaction 
model of the perching system with a gripping end effector 
hasn’t been proposed in existing perching mechanism 
development, although grasping in industrial robots has been 
well studied [28][29][30][31]. In light of this, the authors, in 
the previous paper [32], summarized the research on anatomy 
structures of birds involved in perching systematically and 
further generalized the perching procedure of birds into three 
stages, providing fundamental guidelines for perching 
mechanism development and control strategy design. 
Recently we further presented a control strategy based on the 
generalized perching procedure for autonomous perching with 
a quadrotor in [33]. As parallel investigations, in this paper the 
interaction model of perching UAVs is addressed in Section II, 
then design and optimization of the grasping-based perching 
mechanism are presented in Section III, and a new controller 
of the gripper for autonomous perching with a quadrotor is 
designed in Section IV. In Section V experiments on both 
static and dynamic grasping of the perching mechanism and 
on autonomous perching of the whole system with a quadrotor 
are conducted and results are analyzed. Finally, conclusions 
are drawn in Section VI. 
II. TWO-DIMENSIONAL PERCHING MODEL  
A perching model for force analysis covering the target, 
the perching mechanism and the UAV platform is definitely 
necessary for perching mechanism development. We therefore 
start with modeling of such interactions.  
Several conditions are prescribed as follows. Firstly, 
quadrotors are taken as the UAV platform since they not only 
are more agile in terms of aerial manipulation but also can 
carry larger payloads compared to fixed-wing UAVs and 
ornithopters of similar size. Secondly, the configuration of the 
perching mechanism is supposed to be symmetric about 
longitudinal and lateral planes as a quadrotor is. Thirdly, a 
gripping mechanism mimicking birds’ foot is chosen as the 
end effector for perching. Certainly a gripper cannot suit all 
potential perching circumstances, for instance, vertical 
surfaces, but it works with most common perch in nature such 
as tree branches, roofs and ground. This is also why a 
cylindrical pole fixed to ground reference frame, 
approximating tree branches, is adopted as the target perch in 
the investigations. Moreover, envelop grasping with form 
closure and frictional point contacts from grasping of 
industrial robots [28] are also assumed. Consequently, the 
conditions above lead to a simplified two-dimensional 
perching model in the longitudinal plane, as shown in Figure 
1. 
The mass of the quadrotor is represented by M. The 
perching mechanism consists of a gripper, which outputs 
grasping forces  
 
 to the target ( 
 
 
 in Figure 1 denotes 
reaction forces of  
 
) via a pair of digits, and the frame 
structure, which keeps the center of gravity of the quadrotor a 
distance of H from the grasping center. To derive form-closure 
grasp, the digit is assumed to have a curvature with a certain 
angle ?. Two contact points exist between each digit and the 
target of diameter d, and  
 
 is in the direction of the bisector of 
? as the resultant force. Friction forces applied to the perching 
mechanism at contact points are represented by  
 
, i=1,2,3,4. 
In the 2D model only a pair of digit is considered for 
simplification, although two pairs are needed in reality to gain 
lateral balance of the quadrotor. Furthermore, a horizontal 
disturbance force  
 
 simulating wind disturbance is imposed 
to the quadrotor to generalize the model. At the same time a 
misalignment angle ? exists between the orientation axis of the 
perching mechanism and the vertical axis of ground reference 
frame.  
  
 denotes the reaction force of G and  
 
. 
 
Figure 1. Two-dimensional Perching Model of a UAV system 
It is obvious from the model that the balance of the whole 
system is maintained by the torque T derived from the friction 
forces  
 
. As the quadrotor is able to hover as a helicopter, a 
less aggressive perching trajectory, following which the 
quadrotor flies horizontally to the above of the target and 
descends gradually to the target, is adopted. Consequently 
only static friction case is considered, and all friction forces  
 
 
are assumed to be equal. Note that such a 2D model is still 
applicable to dynamic analysis of perching as long as dynamic 
properties are associated to every single degree of freedom 
respectively. 
Based on the assumptions above, the static moment 
equilibrium equation and the relation between  
 
 and  
 
 can 
then be written as 
 
          
 
        
 
 
∑ 
 
 
   
, (1) 
 
 
 
   
 
     
 
 
 ⁄          ,  (2) 
where ? is the static friction coefficient between the digits and 
the target. Therefore, in the critical case where  
 
 reaches the 
maximum, it can be obtained that 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
         
 
     . 
(3) 
The quadrotor utilized weighs around 1.3kg, including the 
battery. Taking the possible extra weight of the perching 
mechanism into account, it is reasonable to prescribe the mass 
of the UAV, M, to be 1.8kg. With the geometry of the 
quadrotor known, the disturbance force  
 
 due to sideway 
wind is estimated to be 1N, the distance H is assumed to be 
3110
  
0.15m and the diameter d of the target is set as 0.1m. The 
maximum misalignment angle  
   
 is prescribed to be 30
?
 for 
the safety of the UAV, and the digit curvature angle ? is 
assumed to be 140
?
 to achieve envelop grasp. The coefficients 
of static friction between wood and some common materials 
range from 0.2 to 0.8, while those between rubber and 
common materials are mostly larger than 0.4 [34]. As rubber is 
supposedly to be applied to the digits, a conservative value of 
0.4 is estimated for the coefficient of static friction ?. 
Consequently parameters assumed are listed in TABLE I.  
TABLE I.  ASSUMED VALUE OF MODEL PARAMETERS  
M 
(kg) 
 
 
 
(N) 
 
   
  
(degree) 
H 
(m) 
? 
(degree) 
d 
(m) 
? 
1.8 1 30 0.15 140 0.1 0.4 
Submitting the values above into (3) derives that the 
required grasping force  
  
 is 34.1N. Assuming the actuation 
force results from the output torque  
 
 of a servo with a 
common horn length ( 
 
) of 2 to 4 cm, the following 
requirement of the servo can be further obtained. 
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
    { 
 
}             (4) 
Therefore a Futaba servo of max output torque  
    
 of 37 
kgf•cm is employed. To establish a design reference, the force 
transfer ratio of the perching mechanism is defined as follows 
based on the 2D perching model. 
 
  
  
 
 
 
, (5) 
where  
 
 is the actuation force from the actuator. Therefore 
the estimated force transfer ratio  
 
 of the perching 
mechanism can be derived as 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
     . (6) 
III. PERCHING MECHANISM DESIGN 
A. Force Amplification 
Force amplification can be defined as a process with force 
transfer ratio larger than one. For a perching mechanism using 
gripping method, the larger the grasping forces it can generate, 
the larger the friction forces there could be to secure the 
perching status. Force amplification can thus benefit the 
performance of the perching mechanism significantly by 
increasing its force transfer ratio. A force amplifying concept 
in Figure 2 is applied. 
 
Figure 2. The Force Amplifying Concept 
If two pairs of force are applied to the four joints of a 
rhombic four-bar linkage symmetrically as depicted in Figure 
2, the transfer ratio from  
 
 to  
 
 can be expressed as  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
. (7) 
It’s obvious that  
 
   when 90
?
<?≤180
?
. Moreover, as ? 
increases to 180
?
,  
 
tends to become infinite. This 
characteristic of force amplification is therefore used for the 
perching mechanism. To simplify the mechanism, only half of 
the rhombic linkage (the part enclosed by dashed lines in 
Figure 2) is utilized in our design. Note that such a 
simplification has no effect on  
 
 and  
 
 can be balanced by 
vertical reaction forces at the joints where  
 
 is outputted. 
B. Kinematic Optimization of the Gripping Mechanism 
Taking into account the design reference ? and making use 
of the force amplifying concept, a gripping mechanism is 
designed as in Figure 3. The actuation force generated by the 
servo is transmitted to the gripping digits via the shaft 
constrained to vertical linear motion and the transmission arms 
which in pairs form a force amplifier of half rhombic 
configuration. The force transfer ratio of the mechanism 
should be maximized via kinematic optimization. 
  
Figure 3. The gripping mechanism for perching (adopted from [33]) 
The gripping mechanism is based on four-bar linkages 
which consist of actuation shaft, transmission arm, digit and 
the frame. Therefore a kinematic diagram is drawn in Figure 4 
for analysis. The origin of the reference frame is set to the 
fixed joint. The slider is constrained to vertical linear motion, 
serving as the input link, and its coordinate is (L, S) where L is 
constant and S is variable. The lengths of the output link, i.e., 
the digit, and the coupler link, i.e., the transmission arm, are 
represented with D and T respectively. The angle ?/2 between 
the transmission arm and vertical axis is defined as the input 
angle, the angle ? between the digit and the transmission arm 
denotes the coupling angle, and the angle ? between the digit 
and x axis is defined as the output angle. 
 
Figure 4. Kinematic diagram of the gripping mechanism 
3111
  
In Figure 4, the input actuation force is denoted by  
 
 ⁄ , while 
the output force transmitted to the digit is represented by  
 
. 
 
 
 
 is the reaction force of  
 
 applied to the transmission link, 
and  
 
 is the horizontal squeezing force. As the digit can only 
rotate, the effective output force,  
 
, can be expressed as 
 
 
 
  
 
          
 
     
 
 
    
    
 
 
. 
(8) 
Therefore the force transfer ratio is 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
⁄
 
    
   
 
 
. 
(9) 
To maximize ?,   should be maintained in the 
neighborhood of 90
?
 and   should be as close to 180
?
 as 
possible. As both   and   vary with respect to the position 
input S, their relations with S are first derived.  
Based on the geometry of the mechanism in x and y 
directions, the equations below can be obtained. 
 
{
    (  
 
 
)     
 
 
  
    (  
 
 
)     
 
 
  
. (10) 
Eliminating ? and ? separately yields the equations below.  
      
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
, (11) 
      
 
 
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
  √ 
 
  
 
,  (12) 
where ? satisfies      
 
 
. These relationships can also be 
derived from the triangle, consisting of D, T and the side from 
the origin to the slider, by using the law of cosines. 
Taking the dimensions of the quadrotor utilized into 
account, L is prescribed to be 35mm. Due to the limit of the 
mechanism height H, D is set to be 20mm. Moreover, the 
range of input S is limited to [-7, 12] mm which is the 
applicable workspace for the actuation shaft. Hence,   is 
reduced to be a function of S and T, and only T needs to be 
determined. An accumulated force transfer ratio  
 
 is further 
defined as 
 
 
 
    ∫      
 
   
 
   
  . (13) 
Given a constant actuation force  
 
,  
 
 reflects the overall 
effectiveness of force amplification over the workspace of S 
with different T. Also, it covers the influence of different 
target diameter d, as individual S corresponds to individual d. 
To identify the constraints imposed on T, the range of      is 
considered. Obviously,          . It can thus be 
obtained from Eqn. (11) that 
 √| |
   
 
  
 
     √| |
   
 
  
 
  . (14) 
Furthermore, two cases of singularity, in which ? reaches 
180
0
 before S reaches the maximum position or ? reaches 180
0
 
when S is maximum, and one extreme case, in which ? reaches 
90
0
 when S is maximum, are considered. See Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. Three extreme cases for constraints of T. (1): singularity of ?; (2): 
singularity of ?; (3): maximum ?. 
The corresponding constraints on T can therefore be derived 
as below. 
For ?: 
   √ 
 
  
   
 
     √ 
 
  
   
 
, 
(15) 
For ? and ?: 
 √ 
 
  
   
 
     √    
   
 
 
  
 
, (16) 
Consequently, the optimization problem can be expressed 
as 
Objective: Maximize  
 
   , 
Subject to:     
   
  
   
 , Inequalities (14), (15) and (16). 
The optimization problem defined above is investigated 
numerically using Matlab. S and T are discretized first within 
their constraint ranges, and values of  
 
 with different values 
of  
 
 are then calculated and illustrated in Figure 6. It’s 
obvious that the maximum of  
 
 corresponds to  
 
     m. 
The force transfer ratio ? in this case with respect to S is 
further calculated and shown in Figure 7. It shows that the 
force transfer ratio is already larger than 1 at the initial 
position and it increases gradually to almost 12 at the 
maximum input position. Such a characteristic is consistent 
with the fact that the smaller the diameter of the target is, the 
larger the grasping force is needed to generate the balancing 
moment for the quadrotor, and will therefore greatly benefit 
the grasping performance of the perching mechanism. The 
initial force transfer ratio of 1.3 is still acceptable since the 
impact at the beginning of perching will facilitate the grasping, 
resulting in less actuation force required from the motor. The 
maximum force transfer ratio of 12 is rather promising, with 
combination of a powerful motor. 
 
Figure 6. Accumulated force transfer ratio  
 
 under different lengths of T 
 
Figure 7. Force transfer ratio ? under the optimal  
 
      m 
As the digit is a solid link that works as a lever about its 
pivot joint, it introduces a constant force transfer ratio K into 
the force transmission loop. K can be determined according to 
the workspace required for various applications. The overall 
force transfer ratio  
   
 for the perching mechanism can 
further be written as 
 
 
   
            
 
 
⁄ (17) 
0.02 0.022 0.024 0.026 0.028 0.03 0.032 0.034
40
45
50
55
60
T (m)
Accumulated
 Force Transfer Ratio
-6 -4 -2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12
x 10
-3
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
S (m)
Force Transfer Ratio
(1) (2) (3) 
3112
  
As impact happens during perching, the perching 
mechanism is supposed to be strong enough to withstand it. 
Another critical issue of perching with UAVs is the weight of 
the mechanism, or payload capacity of the UAVs. In the case 
of perching, the less the perching mechanism weighs, the more 
agility in manipulation it will give the UAV, which will 
significantly benefit the whole perching system. Therefore, 
carbon fiber sheets are utilized for the mechanism frame and 
the digits to increase the strength of the whole structure and 
also reduce its weight. Nylon spacers are employed to support 
the frames, and Delrin shafts are designed for all the revolute 
joints. As a result, the mechanism, including the servo, weighs 
only about 350g which is far within the payload capacity of the 
quadrotor used. See Figure 8 for the final perching mechanism 
that is designed and fabricated. Two pairs of the gripping 
mechanism are employed such that effective grasp is 
guaranteed and lateral stability of the quadrotor is secured. 
 
Figure 8. Final version of the perching mechanism (left: lateral view; right: 
front view.) 
IV. CONTROLLER DESIGN FOR AUTONOMOUS PERCHING 
Some drawbacks of the previous controller [33] were 
found during perching experiments. For instance, duty cycle is 
tuned instantly to the target position with respect to the force 
error. This leads to significant current sinking when force 
sensor readings are not accurate enough and over-grasping 
happens. It puts the servo at risk of damage and also decreases 
the energy efficiency. The controller is redesigned to improve 
its performance in duty cycle tuning here. 
The controller is refined based on the characteristics of the 
servo. The only parameter of the servo that can be directly 
controlled is the angular position of its shaft, while the output 
torque is internally controlled by its own onboard controller. 
As long as position error exists and the required output torque 
is within its capability, the actual output torque will be 
increased automatically. Therefore a threshold  
 
 of the force 
feedback from the force sensors can be set as a Boolean 
indicator of the gripper status. It means the gripper contacts 
the target and starts grasping it when force feedback exceeds 
the threshold  
 
. The duty cycle  
 
 should be tuned at the 
optimal step which makes the servo actuate at the fastest speed 
when no contact happens; otherwise the step itself should be 
varied accordingly to the actual grasping force such that 
grasping under loading can be finished as quickly as possible 
while avoiding damaging the servo. Consequently, the 
controller can be expressed as 
  
 
     
 
       
    
, (18) 
 
 
    
 {
 
   
                              
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
             
 
  
 
  
 
                                     
 
  
 
, (19) 
where  
 
    is discrete duty cycle value,  
    
 is the step 
value for tuning the duty cycle,  
   
 is the optimal step value 
that leads to the fastest rotation of the servo,    is the 
resolution of duty cycle for the specific servo,  
 
 and  
 
 are 
coefficients that adjust the step value during grasping, 
          and it increases with  . Note that in our case 
 
   
 and    are estimated to be 120ms and 10ms according to 
the datasheet of the servo, and  
 
 and  
 
 are experimentally 
determined to be 0.5 and 1. 
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
With different versions of the perching mechanism during 
the process of finalization, we perform a series of experiments 
to assess its grasping ability and reliability of autonomous 
perching in various scenarios. As mentioned, a tube of 
diameter 10cm attached to an aluminum frame is utilized as 
the target pole, and a piece of foam and rubber is coiled around 
the tube respectively in different experiments to increase the 
friction coefficient to the estimated value in the model.  
A. Static Grasping with the Perching Mechanism Alone 
In the experiments of static grasping, a payload is first 
attached to the gripper, simulating the weight of the quadrotor. 
Then the gripper is aligned directly over the pole and actuated 
to grasp the pole completely. While the gripper is maintaining 
the grasp, we tilt the pole gradually until the gripper slips off. 
Weights of 1kg and 2kg are utilized in the experiments 
respectively. Figure 9 depicts the max misalignment angles 
that the gripper can hold to in the experiments.  
 
Figure 9. Static grasp under misalignment and payload with the first 
version prototype (Left: 1kg; Right: 2kg) 
It can be seen that with 1kg payload, the gripper can hold 
up to 60
?
 of misalignment angle, while up to 35
?
 with 2kg 
payload. The experiment results are generally consistent with 
the model assumptions. Since a quadrotor which can hover 
and then descend for perching is utilized as the UAV platform, 
the misalignment angle is generally supposed to be close to 0
?
. 
Therefore, the results reveal that the grasping force generated 
by the gripper is large enough to secure the quadrotor in 
general perching circumstances. 
B. Dynamic Perching with the Perching Mechanism 
Mounted to the Quadrotor 
Three experiments of dynamic perching with the second 
version of the gripping mechanism are conducted in our lab, 
the first being taking off from ground and perching to a target 
pole, the second being re-launching from the pole and 
perching again, and the third being re-launching from the pole 
and perching with a misalignment angle. One more 
experiment of dynamic perching to a tree is performed in 
nature. The experiment protocols are illustrated in Figure 10 
and Figure 11, respectively. The quadrotor and the perching 
mechanism are remotely controlled during these experiments. 
Trigger 
Servo 
Digits 
Servo Horn 
Carbon Fiber Sheets 
Force Sensors 
Nylon 
Spacers 
Transmission 
Rod 
Linear  
Shafts 
60
? 35
? 
3113
  
In experiment 1, the UAV system successfully perches to 
the pole with the first trial, although only digit tips contacts the 
pole. It shows that even an incomplete grasp can secure the 
perching. In experiment 2, the quadrotor stumbles a bit when 
re-launching, but it manages to release from the pole and take 
off. Moreover, the perching later is properly performed in 
terms of alignment with the pole, and a complete grasp is 
achieved. In experiment 3, the quadrotor succeeds in 
launching again and it happens to misalign with the pole 
during perching, leading to a misaligned but complete grasp. 
The misalignment angle is within the range that the gripper 
can withstand, so the perching is still reliable. 
 
Figure 10. Perching experiments with the quadrotor (left to right: three 
experiments; top to bottom: procedures of each perching)  
In experiment 4, the quadrotor takes off from ground and 
perches to a tree branch with sufficient clearance to approach 
and with moderate diameter to grasp. It can be seen that 
misalignment between the gripper and the tree branch exists 
and the final perching state is a little off balance in lateral 
direction. This is because of the error in remote control of the 
quadrotor and the breeze blowing during the experiment. 
However, the whole perching procedure is still very smooth 
and the perching is deemed as reliable since no oscillation of 
the quadrotor is observed after perched. 
 
Figure 11. Perching to a tree branch (1: Pre-perch; 2: Perching; 3: Perched) 
Based on the results we can conclude that the grasping 
ability and reliability of the perching mechanism during 
dynamic perching are validated for both lab and nature 
environments. The perching mechanism designed is effective 
for remotely-controlled perching with a quadrotor. 
C. Autonomous Grasping with the Controller 
 As the perching mechanism has already been validated to 
be effective for perching under remote control, we further 
implement the controller and test its reliability of autonomous 
grasping. In this experiment the perching mechanism is 
assembled to a quadrotor and dropped from above the pole. 
Once triggered, it will grasp the pole autonomously. See 
Figure 12. 
 
Figure 12. Drop-and-Grasp (1: Align the quadrotor with the pole; 2: Drop 
the quadrotor; 3: The perching mechanism gets triggered upon impact and 
grasps autonomously) 
The drop-and-grasp test was conducted dozens of times, 
and the perching mechanism succeeded in grasping the target 
firmly in most of them. Figure 12 shows a successful grasp 
even with a certain misalignment angle which is caused by the 
impact and rebound during engagement with the target. In 
summary, the performance of the perching mechanism is 
rather consistent with those in previous manual testing, and 
the controller is therefore reliable enough for autonomous 
perching with a quadrotor. 
D. Autonomous Perching with a Quadrotor 
Experiments on autonomous perching with a quadrotor 
are conducted after the perching mechanism and the 
controller are verified. The experimental setup is shown in 
Figure 13, and is basically the same as that demonstrated in 
[33]. Note that autonomous control of the quadrotor via 
VICON motion capture system is implemented by the authors’ 
colleagues, and it is therefore not covered in this paper. 
 
Figure 13. Experimental Setup for Autonomous Perching with a Quadrotor 
  
Figure 14. Autonomous perching (1: approaching, 2: aligning and declining, 
and 3: grasping and perched) and de-perching (4: releasing, 5: rebuilding 
flight, and 6: fly away) 
As shown in Figure 14, the quadrotor autonomously flies 
to the above of the target and hovers to align. After aligned it 
descends vertically to perch to the target. The perching 
mechanism will be automatically actuated to grasp once it’s 
triggered by the target. When reliable perching is achieved the 
3114
  
quadrotor will then shut down. To re-launch the quadrotor, the 
perching mechanism will release from the target when the 
lifting force is large enough to rebuild the flight. The 
autonomous perching is successfully repeated for several 
times, and failure rarely occurs after initial adjustment of 
testing setup, which reveals the effectiveness and reliability of 
the perching mechanism and the controller designed for 
autonomous perching with the quadrotor. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper the authors develop an autonomous perching 
mechanism based on grasping for applications with quadrotors. 
The 2D perching model is simple, but it provides sufficient 
support for perching mechanism design. The force transfer 
ratio of the perching mechanism is maximized by kinematic 
optimization. A controller for fine tuning the duty cycle of the 
servo is also designed. Experiments show that the perching 
mechanism is capable of both perching a quadrotor to and 
re-launching it from the target pole autonomously, and the 
perching reliability is guaranteed even under misalignment. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the Defence Science 
Organization (DSO), Singapore for its sponsorship to this 
work. We would also express our gratitude to Zhao Weihua 
and Chiew Soon Hooi for the reliable quadrotor platform that 
they provide. Besides, Tan Wee Kiat, Quek Jian Xing and 
Liang Hongde’s contributions are sincerely appreciated too. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Owen, On the anatomy of vertebrates. II. Birds and mammals, 
London: Longman Green, 1866. 
[2] M. Watson, “On the mechanisms of perching in birds,” Journal of 
Anatomy. Vol. 3, pp. 379-384, 1869. 
[3] J. L. Renaut, “Recherches sur las transformation vesiculeuse des 
elements cellulaires des tendons (Cellules tubulaires de Ranvier),” 
Archs Physiol Norm Path, Vol. 4, pp. 271-191, 1872. 
[4] I. Ranvier, “Sur les tendons des doigts chez les oiseaux. J 
Micrographie. Histologie humaine et comparee. Anatomie vegetale. 
Botanique. Zoologie. Bacteriologie,” Applications diverses du 
Microscope, Vol. 13, pp. 167-171, 1889. 
[5] P. Galton, and J. Shepherd, “Experimental analysis of perching in the 
European starling (Sturnus vulgaris: Passeriformes; passeres), and the 
automatic perching mechanism of birds,” Journal of Experimental 
Zoology, vol. 317, pp. 205-215, 2012. 
[6] B. Wilson, Birds: Readings From “Scientific American”. San 
Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1980. 
[7] T. H. Quinn, and J. J. Baumel, “The digital tendon locking mechanism 
of the avian foot (Aves),” Zoomorphology, Vol. 109, pp. 281-293, 
1990. 
[8] T. H. Quinn, and J. J. Baumel, “Chiropteran Tendon Locking 
Mechanism,” Journal of Morphology, Vol. 216, pp. 197-208, 1993. 
[9] H. Fisher, “The landing forces of domestic pigeons,” The Auk, Vol. 73, 
No. 1, pp. 85-105, 1956. 
[10] H. Fisher, “Apparatus to measure forces involved in the landing and 
taking off of birds,” The American Midland Naturalist, Vol. 55, pp. 
334-342, 1956. 
[11] F. Heppner, and J. Anderson, “Leg thrust important in flight take-off in 
the pigeon,” Journal of Experimental Biology, Vol. 114, pp. 285-288, 
1985. 
[12] R. Bonser, and J. Rayner, “Measuring leg thrust forces in the common 
starling,” The Journal of Experimental Biology, Vol. 199, pp. 435-439, 
1996. 
[13] P. Green, and P. Cheng, “Variation in kinematics and dynamics of the 
landing flight of pigeons on a novel perch,” The Journal of 
Experimental Biology, Vol. 201, pp. 3309-3316, 1998. 
[14] A. Wickenheiser, and E. Garcia, “Longitudinal Dynamics of a Perching 
Aircraft,” Journal of Aircraft, vol. 43, no. 5, pp.1386-1392, 2006. 
[15] A. Wickenheiser, and E. Garcia, “Optimization of Perching maneuvers 
Through Vehicle Morphing,” Journal of Guidance, Control, and 
Dynamics, vol. 31, no. 4, pp.815-823, 2008. 
[16] R. Cory, and R. Tedrake, “Experiments in Fixed-Wing UAV 
Perching,” AIAA Guidance, Navigation and Control Conference and 
Exhibit, August 2008, Honolulu, USA. 
[17] J. Roberts, R. Cory, and R. Tedrake, “On the Controllability of 
Fixed-Wing Perching,” 2009 American Control Conference, June 
2009, Hyatt Regency Riverfront, USA. 
[18] D. Mellinger, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Trajectory generation and 
control for precise aggressive maneuvers with quadrotors,” The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 31, no. 5, pp.664-674, 
2012. 
[19] D. Mellinger, M. Shomin, and V. Kumar, “Control of Quadrotors for 
Robust Perching and Landing,” International Powered Lift Conference, 
October 2010, Philadelphia, USA. 
[20] M. Anderson, C. Perry, B. Hua, D. Olsen, J. Parcus, K. Pederson, and D. 
Jensen, “The Sticky-Pad Plane and other Innovative Concepts for 
Perching UAVs,” 47th AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting Including 
The New Horizons Forum and Aerospace Exposition, January 2009, 
Orlando, USA. 
[21] M. Kova?, J. Germann, C. Hü urzeler, R. Siegwart, and D. Floreano, “A 
Perching Mechanism for Micro Aerial Vehicles,” Journal of 
Micro-Nano Mechatronics, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 77, 2010. 
[22] A. Desbiens, and M. Cutkosky, “Landing and Perching on Vertical 
Surfaces with Microspines for Small Unmanned Air Vehicles,” Journal 
of Intelligent Robot System, vol. 57, pp. 313-327, 2010. 
[23] A. Desbiens, A. Asbeck, S. Dastoor, and M. Cutkosky, “Hybrid Aerial 
and Scansorial Robotics,” 2010 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, pp. 1114-1115, 2010. 
[24] C. Doyle, J. Bird, T. Isom, J. Johnson, J. Kallman, J. Simpson, R. King, 
J. Abbott, and M. Minor, “Avian-Inspired Passive Perching Mechanism 
for Robotic Rotorcraft,” 2011 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems, September 2011, San Francisco, USA. 
[25] C. Doyle, J. Bird, T. Isom, J. Kallman, D. Bareiss, D. Dunlop, R. King, 
J. Abbott, and M. Minor, “An Avian-Inspired Passive Mechanism for 
Quadrotor Perching,” IEEE/ASME Transaction on Mechatronics, vol. 
18, no. 2, pp. 506-517, Apr. 2013. 
[26] A. Nagendran, W. Crowther, and R. Richardson, “Biologically Inspired 
Legs for UAV Perched Landing,” IEEE A&E Systems Magazine, vol. 
27, issue 2, pp. 4-13, 2012. 
[27] P. Xie, O. Ma, and Z. Zhang, “A Bio-inspired Approach for UAV 
Landing and Perching,” AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control 
(GNC) Conference, August 2013, Boston, USA. 
[28] A. Bicchi, “On the closure properties of robotic grasping,” The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 
319-334, 1995. 
[29] K. B. Shimoga, “Robot Grasp Synthesis Algorithms: A Survey,” The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, Vol. 15, No. 3, pp. 
230-266, 1996. 
[30] K. B. Shimoga, and A. A. Goldenberg, “Soft Robotic Fingertips Part II: 
Modeling and Impedance Regulation,” The International Journal of 
Robotics Research, Vol. 15, No. 4, pp. 335-350, 1996. 
[31] C. Lanni, and M. Ceccarelli, “An Optimization Problem Algorithm for 
Kinematic Design of Mechanisms for Two-Finger Grippers,” The Open 
Mechanical Engineering Journal, Vol. 3, pp. 49-62, 2009. 
[32] W. Chi, K. H. Low, K. H. Hoon, J. Tang, and T. H. Go, “A Bio-inspired 
Adaptive Perching Mechanism for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,” 
Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 642-648, 
2012. 
[33] W. Chi, K. H. Low, K. H. Hoon, and J. Tang, “Design of Control 
Strategy for Autonomous Perching with a Quadrotor,” The 4
th
 
International Conference of Bionic Engineering, August 2013, Nanjing, 
China. 
[34] Engineer’s Handbook (2013), Reference Tables [Online]. Available: 
http://www.engineershandbook.com/Tables/frictioncoefficients.htm 
 
3115
