  
 
 
? 
Abstract— Astronauts must go through extensive training of 
their tasks in a simulated microgravity or reduced-gravity 
environment before they can perform the same tasks in space. 
Scientists and engineers also need simulated reduced-gravity 
facilities to study human performance and factors in space. 
This paper presents a novel design and prototype test of a 
multi-DOF reduced-gravity simulator which can be used for 
training astronauts and studying human factors in zero or 
partial gravity environment. Designed based on the passive 
static balancing technology, the simulator can passively 
compensate the gravity force applied to a human to any level 
from 0 to 100% at all the configurations within its workspace. 
Therefore, a person attached to the simulator can 
biomechanically feel like he/she were in a real reduced-gravity 
environment while doing a physical activity such as walking or 
jumping. A prototype of the simulator was developed to study 
the feasibility and dynamic performance of the system. The 
prototype study demonstrated the reduced-gravity simulation 
capability of the system. It also revealed some interesting 
findings which motivate further research in the future. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In human space exploration missions, astronauts are often 
required to perform various intra-vehicle activities (IVA) and 
extra-vehicle activities (EVA) tasks. Such work is done either 
in a microgravity environment such as in the International 
Space Station or in a reduced-gravity environment such as on 
the Moon or Mars. To properly plan and prepare those human 
tasks, astronauts are required to perform extensive training of 
these tasks in simulated reduced-gravity (reduced-G) 
facilities before a real mission can be launched. Astronauts 
usually spend over ten times the real EVA time in a ground-
based microgravity training facility such as a neural 
buoyancy pool to practice a planned EVA task. Similarly, 
space operations engineers usually spend much more than the 
real EVA time to plan and analyze an EVA/IVA task. 
Therefore, the training technology and facility have a 
significant impact on the quality and cost of the EVA/IVA 
planning and training.  
Several existing technologies can be used for EVA 
training in a simulated reduced-G environment, such as the 
water-based neutral buoyancy [1], parabolic-trajectory flight, 
counter-weight suspension [2], cable-based suspension [3], 
air-bearing/gimbal support [4] and virtual reality [5], etc. All 
of these have some drawbacks when used for physical 
simulation of reduced-G environment. For example, the 
neutral buoyance technology suffers from water viscous drag, 
sealing problems and tremendous burden of safety measures; 
 
W. Xiu, K. Ruble and O. Ma are with the Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering Department and the Reduced-Gravity and Biomechanics 
(RGB) Lab, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 USA (e-
mails: wenwuxiu@nmsu.edu; kruble@nmsu.edu; oma@nmsu.edu).   
a parabolic-trajectory flight can simulate zero- or reduced-G 
for only 10-30 seconds and thus, is too short for training most 
of the EVA tasks; a counterweight balanced or cable-based 
suspension system can effectively provide only 1-DOF 
controlled motion in the vertical direction while the other 
DOFs are either constrained or with extra forces which do not 
exist in space; an air-bearing supported system is basically a 
2-D simulation; the virtual reality simulation gives only a 
visual effect without real physical reaction. In short, all these 
existing reduced-G simulation technologies either cannot 
generate a full 3-D physical motion (as it would occur in 
space) or cannot operate in ambient conditions (i.e., a regular 
lab setting). Hence, there exists motivation to look for 
innovative reduced-G simulation methods having advantages 
of low cost, easy implementation and simple operation. 
 
Fig. 1  Concept design of the passive reduced gravity simulator 
In this project we are developing a new reduced-G 
simulation technology for studying human locomotion in a 
reduced-G (including micro-G) environment. The concept 
design of such a simulator is shown in Fig. 1. The passive 
mechanism is designed based on the spring-based passive 
static balancing technology. Static balancing of a mechanism 
refers to the status that no joint forces or torques are required 
to keep the mechanism in static equilibrium for any 
configuration within its workspace [6, 7]. Therefore, a 
statically-balanced mechanism can be used to compensate the 
total or partial gravity force of a person who is attached to the 
mechanism. Passive static balancing means that no actuators 
are required to achieve static balancing and thus, the 
mechanism is a completely passive system. The proposed 
simulator takes the advantage of the passive static balancing 
A Reduced-Gravity Simulator for Physically Simulating Human 
Walking in Microgravity or Reduced-Gravity Environment 
Wenwu Xiu, Kenneth Ruble, and Ou Ma, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4837
  
technology, and allows simulating any desired G level (e.g., 
17%G for the lunar gravity or 38%G for the Martian gravity). 
Actually, the design of static balancing mechanisms has 
been an active research topic for several decades (see, for 
instance, [8] for a recent overview). There are two basic 
approaches for passive static balancing, namely, using 
counterweights or using springs [9, 10]. Some gravity-
compensated manipulators have been designed using these 
two approaches [11-13]. Although the counterweight 
approach is able to achieve static balancing in any direction 
of the Cartesian space of the mechanism, it introduces 
additional mass into the system, which results in larger inertia 
force (or inertial resistance) to the dynamical system. 
Alternatively, when springs are used for static balancing, the 
total potential energy (the gravitational energy plus elastic 
energy) of the mechanism can be kept constant and the 
weight of the whole mechanism can be balanced using a 
much smaller added mass than that using the counterweight 
approach, as pointed out by [14, 15]. The static balancing 
method has also been introduced to reduce joint torques and 
improve performance of robots [16, 17]. Recently, a passive 
gravity-balanced mechanism was proposed to  compensate 
the weight of a patient’s arm for rehabilitation [18]. 
Moreover, passive gravity-balanced leg exoskeletons have 
also been developed for locomotion training of individuals 
with leg impairments [19, 20]. The effectiveness of the 
passive gravity-balancing of such mechanisms on stability 
issues was studied in [21]. 
This paper describes the design and an early prototype of 
a passive reduced-G simulator for aerospace applications. 
Since the system is based on the static balancing technology, 
its dynamic performance when applied to a human (which is 
a complex dynamic system), needs to be investigated. 
II. DESIGN AND ANALYSIS 
A. Kinematics Design 
The kinematics of the reduced-G simulator is shown in 
Fig. 1. It consists of two parallelogram mechanism sections, a 
torso-support platform, a body harness assembly, and two leg 
exoskeletons. The system has 12 DOFs represented by joint 
angles 
1 2 12
, , , ? ? ? , as marked in Fig. 2. 
The two parallelogram sections plus the torso-support 
platform form a 6-joint mechanism which provides a 5-DOF 
support to the human torso and allows the torso to freely 
move in the three translational axes and two rotational axes 
within the workspace of the mechanism. The only 
constrained rotational DOF is the roll rotation of the torso 
about a horizontal axis in the sagittal plane. In fact, this 
motion component is the least significant one in all the 6 
motion components during normal human walking. A 
human leg is known to have 7 DOFs (3 DOFs with the hip 
joint, 1 DOF with the knee joint, and 3 DOFs with the ankle 
joint) [22]. The leg exoskeleton, attached to the human thigh 
(upper leg) and crus (lower leg), has 3 joints, which allows a 
2-DOF rotation of the hip joint and 1-DOF rotation of the 
knee joint. The exoskeleton ends above the ankle joint and 
thus, it does not constrain any mobility of the ankle joint. 
This means that the exoskeleton constrains only one of the 
human leg’s seven natural DOFs, which is the hip rotation 
off the sagittal plane. Based on human gait analysis [22], this 
rotational motion of a leg is negligible during normal 
walking. The reasons for having the above-mentioned two 
constraints in the mechanism design are: 1) the constrained 
motion components are least significant in a walk gait; 2) it 
significantly simplified the mechanical design of the system.  
B. Gravity Force Compensation 
The reduced-G simulator uses seven springs to 
compensate the weights of the mechanism and the attached 
human. The arrangement of the springs is shown in Fig. 2. 
The stiffness values of the springs are denoted by
7 2 1
, , , k k k ? . Among these springs, the first two are attached 
to the two parallelogram sections, the third one is attached to 
the torso-support platform, and the fourth and fifth ones are 
on one leg exoskeleton and the last two are on the other 
exoskeleton. In the design, we assume that the two legs of a 
human are identical in both geometric and inertial properties 
and thus, the springs on both legs are also identical, namely, 
4 6
k k ? and 
5 7
k k ? . 
h
1
First Parallelogram
Second Parallelogram
Strut
Body
Legs
g
h
2
d
1
Z
X
d
2
d
3
d4
d5
l
3
r
6
k
1
k
2
k
3
k4
k5
m
1
m
2
m
3
m4
m5
m
6
r5
h4
r4
l4
l5
l
1
l
2
r
1
r
2
?1
?2
?3
?8
?4
?6
?5
?7
?9
r
3
?10
?11
A
1
A
2
A
3
A
4
A
5
Fig. 2  Kinematic notation of the passive reduced-G simulator 
Since we apply the principle of passive static balancing, 
the total potential energy of the mechanism contributed by 
both the gravity field and the springs should be constant [14] 
for all the working configurations of the system in its 
workspace. This can be mathematically described as 
 Constant
Total MG BG S
V V V V ? ? ? ?  (1) 
where, 
MG
V , 
BG
V and 
S
V represent the potential energies of 
the mechanism, human body, and springs, respectively. The 
condition given by (1) assumes that all the gravity forces are 
compensated. If just partial gravity effect on the attached 
human needs to be compensated, (1) should be modified to 
 Constant
MG BG S
V V V ? ? ? ?  (2) 
where factor ? is the ratio of the compensated gravity force 
over the original gravity force on the human body. Thus, ? is 
also the percentage of the human weight to be removed by 
the mechanism. Note that ? is a factor of only the potential 
energy term of the human, because only the human requires 
a reduced gravity while the gravity of the mechanism has to 
be fully compensated all the time, so that the attached human 
does not need to carry any weight of the mechanism.  
4838
  
Based upon the kinematics notation defined in Fig. 2, the 
total potential energy of the whole system can be expressed 
in terms of the joint angles as follows: 
 
7
0i
i1
cos
Total MG BG S i
V V V V C C ??
?
? ? ? ? ?
?
  (3) 
where 
 
0 1 2 1 2 1 3
2 2 2 2
6 6 5 4 3 3 3 5 5 4
2
2 2 2 2
4 4 4
1
1 1 1 1 2 1 1
2 2 2 2 2 2
3 3 3 3 3 3
4 4 4
(2 )( ) ( )( )
1
2 ( ) ( )
2
1
( ) ( )
2
2 (2 )
2 ( )
(2 ) (
mB
i i i
i
MB
MB
ul
C h h m m g h h M M g
r m g h m g k d h k d h
k d l k d l
C m r g l m g M g M g k d
C m r g l M g M g k d
C m r g k d h
C m m r g m
?
?
?
?
?
?
? ? ? ? ? ?
? ? ? ? ? ?
? ? ? ?
? ? ? ? ?
? ? ? ?
??
? ? ?
?
5 4 4 4 4
5 5 5 5 5 4
6 4 7 5
4 5 6 3
)
()
,    
4 2 ,      2 2
ll
ll
m B ul ll
m l g k d l
C m m r g k d h
C C C C
M m m m M m m m
?
?
??
? ? ?
??
? ? ? ? ? ?
  (4) 
In (4), 
ul
m and 
ll
m represent the mass values of the upper 
leg and the lower leg of the human, and the other parameters 
in the equations have been defined in Fig. 2. It should be 
pointed out that the elastic potential energy 
S
V in (3) and (4) 
is derived based on the assumption that zero-length springs 
(zero-free length springs) [19] are used in the system.  
The only way that guarantees the total energy, as given 
by (3), to be a constant for all configurations is that all the 
coefficients in the second term of the right-hand side of (3) 
become zero. In other words, the conditions for partial 
gravity balancing (i.e. gravity reduction) are: 
 0, 1,2,...,7
i
Ci ??  (5) 
Based on these conditions, one can calculate a set of 
spring stiffness values 
7 2 1
, , , k k k ? in terms of the known 
kinematics and mass parameters of the mechanism and the 
human. Clearly, using seven springs with the calculated 
stiffness values will keep the total potential energy of the 
system as a constant for all the configurations of the 
mechanism and human because the total potential energy is 
independent of the configuration variables. In other words, 
the gravity force on the human body will be compensated to 
the level defined by parameter ?. 
Note that the set of springs with the calculated stiffness 
values is only capable of reducing the gravity for a particular 
person because the spring stiffness values are dependent on 
the body mass. This means that, when the device is used by 
a different person, a new set of springs with different 
stiffnesses has to be used. Obviously, this is inconvenient in 
practice because every individual has different mass 
distribution than others and we cannot have so many 
different sets of springs. A solution to this problem is to use 
the same set of springs for everyone but leave the springs’ 
attachment points adjustable, namely, to use different sets of 
the ) 7 , , 2 , 1 ( ? ? i d
i
 values for different people. This is to 
adjust the attachment points 
7 2 1
, , , A A A ? (see Fig. 2) of 
the springs based on the mass of the person on the device. 
The adjustment is also based on (5) assuming fixed spring 
stiffness values, namely, 
 
1 1 1 2
1
11
2 2 2
2
22
3 3 5 5
3 5 7
3 3 4 5
4 4 5 4
46
44
22
2 ( )
()
,     
(2 ) ( )
MB
MB
ll
ul ll
m r l ( m M M )
dg
lk
m r l M M
dg
lk
m r m m r
d g d d g
h k h k
m m r m m l
d d g
lk
?
?
??
??
? ? ?
?
??
?
?
? ? ?
? ? ?
??
  (6) 
The conditions given in (6) are derived based on the 
assumption that the gravity effect on the human body is 
partially compensated by the ratio of ?. If a zero-gravity (0-
G) condition is needed, ? has to be set to 1. For the planetary 
exploration, one often needs to simulate a reduced-G 
scenario as opposed to the 0-G condition. This requires a ? 
between 0 and 1 depending on the specific application. For 
example, ? should be 0.83 for simulating a lunar activity or 
0.62 for simulating a Martian activity. 
III. PROTOTYPE AND EXPERIMENT 
A.  Prototype Design 
Based on the system design described in Section II, the 
detailed design and manufacturing work of a prototype of the 
reduced-G simulator was launched in 2010 in the Reduced-
Gravity and Biomechanics Laboratory (RGB Lab) at New 
Mexico State University. The first prototype was designed 
and built, as shown in Fig. 4, based on the requirements 
summarized in Table 1. The system looks larger and stronger 
than the concept shown in Fig.1 because we had to impose a 
2.5 safety factor for human safety. All the load-bearing 
components of the system were examined using finite 
element analysis (FEA) software Abaqus under the maximum 
load conditions. The maximum loads were calculated from 
dynamic simulations using MSC Adams and LifeMOD. 
Critical components were over-engineered with strengthened 
structures or materials. Some materials of noncritical 
components or areas were reduced for less inertial effect. 
 
Fig. 4 The complete prototype of the Reduced-G Simulator 
4839
  
Table 1 Major design requirements for the reduced-G simulator 
Requirement Specification 
Human weight range  18 ~ 86 kg  (40 ~ 190 lb) 
Human height range  1.5 ~ 1.85 m (6’1”) 
Simulated gravity range from 0G to 1G 
Horizontal motion range  1.0 m 
Vertical motion range  1.0 m 
Maximum walking speed  3.0 m/s 
Mobility of the human torso  5 DOFs 
Mobility of the human waist  1 DOF 
Mobility of each human hip  2 DOFs 
Mobility of each human knee  1 DOF 
Mobility of other human parts  No limits 
Structure safety factor 2.5 
A rotational ring was designed and attached around the 
test subject’s waist offering the freedom for the human to 
twist his/her torso about the waist. The entire 5-DOF 
mechanism section behind the human torso provides the 
human with a large enough workspace, such that the person 
can move within the workspace as freely as possible. A pair 
of leg exoskeletons was designed to be composed of an upper 
parallelogram and a lower link, providing gravity offloading 
to the legs with rotation freedom around the hip and knee 
joints. The double parallelogram sections, along with the 
springs on the vertical pole, is used to offload the weight of 
the whole human body, while the leg exoskeletons and the 
springs behind the human back are used to compensate the 
weight of the legs and the feet of the human.  
With no “zero length” spring available in reality, it can be 
challenging to make the linear springs mechanically installed 
[23]. To solve this problem, we installed the springs with 
initial tensions in the back of the main vertical pole without 
destroying the gravity offloading effect (see Fig. 4). This also 
offered us the advantage of the least inertial effect on the 
dynamics of the system [24]. Each of the two main springs 
(i.e., k 1 and k 2) is connected to the outer end of its associated 
parallelogram section through a multi-pulley and string chain. 
In order to reduce the amount of the stretch of the springs, 
each spring is split into four parallel springs. In this way, the 
height of the main vertical pole and thus, the overall size of 
the entire system were reduced. 
Torso and leg harnesses are necessary system parts to 
attach the human body to the reduced-G simulator. The 
selection of the proper harnesses could be challenging, i.e., 
the harnesses not only need to be strong and rigid enough to 
support the human weight and secure the body to the 
equipment but also have to be ergonomically friendly to the 
human without causing much concentrating force or pressure 
to the human body. One subjective ergonomic level 
evaluation method with scores ranging from 1 to 5 was 
developed for making choices of harnesses out of the 
commercial available ones. Based on a series of tests of 
several alternative harnesses with volunteers, we selected our 
torso harness (originally for movie shooting) and leg harness 
(originally for medical applications) for the current prototype 
of the reduced-G simulator. 
Although we have built a pair of exoskeletons capable of 
offloading the weights of the human legs, its ergonomic 
integration with the torso-support platform of the reduced-G 
simulator remains a challenging issue. This is because the 
assembly of the springs (i.e., k 4 and k 6) can easily interfere 
with the swing arms, which makes the person uncomfortable 
in walking. We are developing the next generation of the 
exoskeletons. For the time being, to avoid the discomfort 
affecting the test subject’s walking gait or dynamic behavior, 
we did not employ the exoskeletons in our presented walking 
tests. Nevertheless, the actual role of human arms in 
locomotion gaits and dynamics are still not fully understood 
[26]. Further, all of the suspension-based reduced-G facilities 
including NASA’s POGS (used for the Apollo program) and 
ARGOS (used for NASA’s current human and robotics space 
exploration program) do not offload leg weight either [3]. 
B. Adjustment for Desired Gravity Level 
 Equation (6) provides the guideline for adjusting the 
system for a desired weight offloading effect on an attached 
human. However, we found it challenging to adjust the 
simulator for a desired G level with different individuals. To 
solve the problem, an active auto-balancing subsystem was 
developed, by which different gravity conditions can be 
reached automatically. In fact, this subsystem allows an 
actuated adjustment of the spring connection points A 1 and 
A 2 to fit the attached individual. Details of this adjustment 
subsystem has been reported in [25]. It should be 
emphasized that such an adjustment is needed only when 
switching to a different person or changing the desired G 
level. Once an adjustment is completed, the auto-balancing 
subsystem will be turned off and then, the simulator remains 
fully passive for the operation of the subsequent reduced-G 
simulation. 
C. Setup of the Experimental Test System 
In order to investigate the dynamic characteristics of the 
reduced-G simulator for partial gravity simulation, we have 
to measure the motion and force data from the attached 
human body. To this end, a measurement system was 
installed in the RGB Lab, as shown in Fig.5. The system 
consists of a Vicon 3D 
motion capture system 
with 10 cameras for 
measuring the human 
motion data and a Bertec 
dual-belt instrumented 
treadmill for measuring 
the ground reaction force 
and moment of each foot 
of the human. Further, the 
joints of the reduced-G 
mechanism are also 
equipped with optical 
encoders.  
We have tested the 
simulator prototype with 
four student volunteers 
4840
  
recruited from the campus (two males and two females, with 
an average age 24.8 3.2 ? years, height 1.73 0.04 ? m, and 
mass 59.3 12.7 ? kg). An IRB (Institutional Review Board) 
approved informed consent was obtained from each of the 
test subjects for participation in the study. For quantitative 
tests and analysis, the tested activities have been limited 
only to standing, jumping and walking although the system 
can be used to simulate other human activities. 
For each human test, 39 reflective markers (sized 0.5 
inch in diameter) were attached to the body segments of the 
subject to measure the person’s kinematic data. The global 
positions and velocities of these markers were recorded by 
the Vicon cameras at a sampling rate of 100 Hz. The ground 
reaction force and the center of pressure (where the ground 
reaction force exerts) of each foot were measured by the 
dual-belt instrumented treadmill at a sampling rate of 1000 
Hz. The encoder data is also collected from the joints of the 
simulator mechanism. 
In the walking tests, we emphasized to our subjects that 
they were free to choose their most comfortable walking 
speed in each gravity case. This was implemented with the 
following preparation protocol. Prior to actual data 
collection, a test subject was guided to participate in two 
exercise sessions to familiarize himself/herself with the 
simulator’s harnesses and treadmill locomotion. First, the 
subject was asked to walk on the treadmill with the system 
attachment but without any weight offloading. Our tests 
showed that a 5-minute exercise is adequate for a participant 
to feel comfortable with the simulator system for walking on 
the treadmill. In the second session, the test subject was 
asked to finish several trials of walking or jumping in 
different simulated gravity levels. The second session 
typically took from 10 to 30 minutes for a tested subject. 
After that, a participant actually found pretty effortless to 
perform the intended reduced-G test activities on the system.  
IV. EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
The tests of the simulator performed so far were to 
evaluate the gravity-offload capability, study the performance 
of the system, and reveal technical issues to be addressed in 
the future research. We performed nonhuman tests first to 
make sure that the simulator can compensate the weight of a 
payload correctly and it is safe enough for human use. After 
the nonhuman tests were satisfactorily done, we started 
human subject tests. The main results are described in the 
next three subsections.  
A. Tests of Gravity Compensation Capability 
Complete validation of the dynamics of human walking 
in our simulated reduced-G environment is very difficult 
simply because no true data (i.e., space-walk data from 
Moon, Mars or other reduced-G space environments) are 
available for reference, even for NASA researchers. 
However, we can still perform some validation exercises 
through static test cases or nonhuman dynamic test cases. 
A first and easiest test is to examine the simulated weight 
of a person by measuring the ground reaction force while the 
person is standing still while attached to the simulator. The 
measured ground reaction force should match the theoretical 
weight of the person at the simulated G level. Fig. 6 shows 
the result of such a static test, which is perfectly accurate.  
 
Fig. 6 Measured ground reaction force (GRF) vs simulated G level 
The static test method does not apply to the walking case 
because the weight and ground reaction force are no longer 
the same in a dynamic case. Since the true dynamics data of 
human walking in a reduced-G environment is unavailable, 
we used nonhuman tests. A series of drop tests were done to 
verify the free-fall time under different gravity levels. In each 
test an object of known mass was dropped from a known 
height and allowed it to freely fall to the ground. Its total 
falling time was recorded and compared to the theoretical 
free-fall time which can be calculated from 2/ t h g ? , 
where h and g are the height of the dropping point and 
desired gravity acceleration, respectively. Fig. 7 illustrates 
the result of such a set of tests. The test result indicates that 
the simulator has some error and the error increases with the 
amount of gravity compensation. Based on our analysis, this 
error was mainly attributed to the friction in the mechanism 
as to be discussed in Section IV.D. 
 
Fig. 7 Theoretical and measured free-fall times for the drop tests 
B. Motion Data for Walking in Different Gravity Levels 
The accuracy of the simulated gravity effect can also be 
reflected on the kinematics of human motion in a swing 
phase [27]. We tested human walking in five different 
simulated gravity levels specified by: ? =0, 0.25, 0.5, 2/3, and 
5/6. Among these, the ?=0, ?=2/3 and ?=5/6 cases are 
approximately equal to the Earth gravity (1G), Mars gravity 
(0.38G) and Moon gravity (0.17G), respectively. Kinematic 
data representing the body movements of the tested subjects 
were collected. From these motion data, we can extract 
various parameters representing the walking gaits.  
Plotted in Fig. 8 are typical values of the angle of attack 
in three different gravity levels. The angle of attack is 
defined as the supplementary angle of the ankle between a 
foot and calf of a human, which reflects the flexion extent of 
the ankle joint during walking. The larger this parameter’s 
range spans, the more dramatic the leg motion is. Obviously, 
one can see from Fig. 8 that, the more the body weight is 
removed (e.g., from Earth to Moon), the bigger range of the 
4841
  
test subject to tilt his/her ankle joint. One possible 
explanation to this phenomenon is that the test subject gains 
more ability and freedom to move the body with the gravity 
reduction. Actually, what was observed through the testing 
is that the test subject chose hopping/skipping instead of 
walking when the gravity became very low (e.g., in the lunar 
gravity). In fact, people have noticed such a phenomenon in 
the NASA videos from the Apollo missions [28].  
 
Fig. 8  Measured angle-of-attack data in different simulated G levels 
One may notice that the cadence of walking also varies 
with the gravity level. While the cadence of walking from 
the Earth gravity to Mars gravity did not change much (both 
about 0.9 Hz), but that for the lunar gravity dropped to 
almost an half (about 0.47 Hz). With hopping/skipping as a 
preferred locomotion gait, the feet of the test subject stayed 
in air for a longer time (i.e., both feet off the ground for 
some time, which does not happen in a normal walking gait).  
Another interesting kinematic feature to investigate is the 
stability conditions of walking gaits under different gravity 
levels. Instead of analyzing the complex dynamics of the 
human, we observed the distribution of the center of pressure 
(COP) of the feet as a simple performance index for gait 
stability. Typical COP distributions with varying gravity 
levels are shown in Fig. 9. Obviously, the more concentrated 
a COP distribution is, the more stable the corresponding gait 
is. As seen from Fig. 9, the boxed boundary roughly 
represents the area of the COP distribution. As clearly shown, 
the COP becomes more widely distributed as the gravity is 
reduced. This might be caused by the less stability of 
locomotion in a reduced gravity environment. Whether this is 
an inherent characteristic of the human locomotion in 
reduced gravity remains to be investigated in the future. 
 
Fig. 9  COP distribution during walking with different simulated G levels 
C. Ground Reaction Force in Different Gravity Levels  
The magnitude of the ground reaction force of one foot in 
a typical stance cycle (the period when a foot continuously 
touches the ground), is plotted in Fig. 10 for comparison. 
Note that these force profiles are not in the same time scale. 
As one can see, the force profiles in all the five gravity cases 
are different from each other. These differences are reflected 
not only in their shapes but also in their peak values. It is 
clear that the force gradually decreases with the gravity level 
except the lunar gravity case (i.e., the 1/6 G case) where the 
peak force is higher than that in the Mars gravity (i.e., 1/3 G) 
case. This phenomenon, again, should be caused by the fact 
that the subject switched to a hopping/skipping gait in the 
lunar gravity as opposed to just walking as in all the other 
tested gravity levels. In a skipping mode the ground reaction 
force is larger because of the shorter and stronger contact 
between the foot and the ground.   
∆T = 0.403 S
∆T = 0.695 S
∆T = 0.653 S
∆T = 0.554 S
∆T = 0.536 S
Fig. 10  Ground reaction forces on a foot in different gravity levels 
Another obvious phenomenon can be observed from Fig. 
10 is that the gait phases change during walking due to the 
varying gravity. Under the Earth gravity, one can easily see 
that the stance phase of the gait cycle is composed of two 
single-support phases and one double-support phase (both 
feet touching the ground to support the human motion). With 
the gravity reduced, the double-support phase diminished and 
finally replaced by a single-support phase in the Moon 
gravity level. This gait change may be fundamental for 
further understanding the gait strategy of human locomotion 
in space environment.  
D. Issues Affecting the Fidelity of the Simulator 
While still in the concept design stage two years ago, we 
had anticipated that the joint friction and the mass of the 
mechanism would be the two main contributing factors 
limiting the simulation fidelity of the simulator. Our tests 
done so far indicated that the inertia forces were not a main 
concern but the joint friction did cause noticeable impedance 
to the human motion. The observed small inertia effect 
might be because the acceleration associated with human 
walking is naturally small and thus, the resulting inertia 
force is relatively small too. The noticeable friction is 
mainly from the bearings supporting the pulley-string 
chains. This is because each pulley applies a very large load 
on its supporting bearings. The load on a pulley can be as 
4842
  
high as twice the force of its supported spring, generating a 
large configuration-dependent fictional torque on the 
supporting bearings [29]. We have had some ideas to reduce 
the friction effect but the implementation requires significant 
modification to the current design of the mechanism and 
thus, it will be studied in future work. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A reduced-gravity human-rated simulator was designed, 
built and preliminarily tested. Designed based on the passive 
static balancing technology, the simulator has demonstrated 
its capability of passively compensating partial or all the 
gravity force applied to the attached human body in all the 
configurations of the simulator. A series of human and 
nonhuman tests has been conducted for studying the 
functions and performance of the system. Test data indicated 
that the simulator is capable of allowing an attached human 
to biomechanically feel like he/she were in a reduced-gravity 
environment while walking or jumping with the equipment. 
The contribution of this research project is to have 
demonstrated the feasibility of using the spring-based static 
balancing technology for compensating the weight of a 
human body in a multiple-DOF fashion. It opened a 
completely new application area of the static balancing 
technology. It provides a new and low-cost microgravity or 
reduced-gravity simulation technique for training astronauts 
and studying human factors for future human space 
exploration missions. It also provides relatively simple and 
low-cost technology for ordinary people to experience 
physical activities in a simulated space environment. 
The near-time future work includes: a redesign of the leg 
exoskeleton for better integration with the system, study of 
friction reduction measures, and improvement of the 
ergonomic performance of the system. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This project was supported by the National Science 
Foundation through an MRI development grant (#0960156). 
Technical supports of Dr. R. Paz of the EE Department and 
Dr. E. Pines of the IE Department at NMSU as well as 
current and former students Dr. Qi Lu, Dr. Ramon Garcia, 
Ntengwa Mukosa, Jose Barajas, Jason Wright, Samuel King, 
Steve Stroup, Brandi Herrera, Gabriela Anguiano-Molina, 
Rachel Tessier, Ember Krech, Dakota Burrow, etc., who have 
worked on the project, are highly acknowledged.  
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Griffin, "Zero-G simulation verifies EVA servicing of space station 
modules," Rep./AIAA, 1986. 
[2] H. A. Fujii, K. Uchiyama, H. Yoneoka, and T. Maruyama, "Ground-
based simulation of space manipulators using test bed with suspension 
system," Journal of Guidance Control and Dynamics, vol. 19, pp. 985-
991, Sep-Oct, 1996. 
[3] T. Cunningham, "System requirements document for the active 
response gravity offload system (ARGOS)". NASA Engineering 
directorate document AR&SD-08-007. Houston, TX: NASA, 2010.  
[4] J. L. Schwartz, M. A. Peck, and C. D. Hall, "Historical review of air-
bearing spacecraft simulators," Journal of Guidance Control and 
Dynamics, vol. 26, pp. 513-522, Jul-Aug, 2003. 
[5] H. David and G. Charles, "An integrated EVA/RMS virtual reality 
simulation, including force feedback for astronaut training," in Flight 
Simulation Technologies Conference, ed: American Institute of 
Aeronautics and Astronautics, 1996. 
[6] G. J. Walsh, D. A. Streit, and B. J. Gilmore, "Spatial Spring 
Equilibrator Theory," Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 26, pp. 
155-170, 1991. 
[7] O. Ma, Q. Lu, J. McAvoy, and K. Ruble, "Concept Study of a Passive 
Reduced-Gravity Simulator for Training Astronauts," in ASME 2010 
Intl. Design Eng. Tech. Conf., Montreal, 2010. 
[8] Q. Lu, C. Ortega, and O. Ma, "Passive gravity compensation 
mechanisms: Technologies and applications," Recent Patents on 
Engineering, vol. 5, pp. 32-44, 2011. 
[9] I. Ebert-Uphoff, C. m. M. Gosselin, and T. Laliberte?, "Static Balancing 
of Spatial Parallel Platform Mechanisms—Revisited," Journal of 
Mechanical Design, vol. 122, pp. 43-51, 2000. 
[10] R. Barents, M. Schenk, W. D. van Dorsser, B. M. Wisse, and J. L. 
Herder, "Spring-to-Spring Balancing as Energy-Free Adjustment 
Method in Gravity Equilibrators," Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 
133, p. 061010, Jun, 2011. 
[11] C. M. Gosselin and J. Wang, "Static balancing of spatial six?degree?of?
freedom parallel mechanisms with revolute actuators," Journal of 
Robotic Systems, vol. 17, pp. 159-170, 2000. 
[12] L. F. Cardoso, S. Tomázio, and J. L. Herder, "Conceptual Design of a 
Passive Arm Orthosis," in ASME International Design Engineering 
Technical Conferences, Montreal, 2002. 
[13] P. Y. Lin, W. B. Shieh, and D. Z. Chen, "Design of Statically 
Balanced Planar Articulated Manipulators With Spring Suspension," 
Ieee Transactions on Robotics, vol. 28, pp. 12-21, Feb, 2012. 
[14] D. A. Streit and B. J. Gilmore, "Perfect Spring Equilibrators for 
Rotatable Bodies," J. of Mechanisms Transmissions and Automation in 
Design-Transactions of the Asme, vol. 111, pp. 451-458, Dec, 1989. 
[15] C. H. Cho, W. S. Lee, and S. C. Kang, "Design of a Static Balancer 
with Space Mapping," International Journal of Precision Engineering 
and Manufacturing, vol. 14, pp. 61-68, Jan, 2013. 
[16] N. Ulrich and V. Kumar, "Mechanical design methods of improving 
manipulator performance," in Advanced Robotics, 'Robots in 
Unstructured Environments', 91 ICAR., Fifth International Conference 
on, 1991, pp. 515-520. 
[17] S. Shirata, A. Konno, and M. Uchiyama, "Design and evaluation of a 
gravity compensation mechanism for a humanoid robot," in Intelligent 
Robots and Systems, 2007. IROS 2007. IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on, 2007, pp. 3635-3640. 
[18] W. D. Van Dorsser, R. Barents, B. M. Wisse, and J. L. Herder, 
"Gravity-balanced arm support with energy-free adjustment," Journal 
of medical devices, vol. 1, pp. 151-158, 2007. 
[19] A. Fattah and S. K. Agrawal, "On the design of a passive orthosis to 
gravity balance human legs," Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 127, 
pp. 802-808, Jul, 2005. 
[20] S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal, A. Fattah, V. Krishnamoorthy, W. L. 
Hsu, J. Scholz, et al., "Gravity-balancing leg orthosis and its 
performance evaluation," IEEE Trans. on Robotics, vol. 22, pp. 1228-
1239, 2006. 
[21] A. Agrawal and S. K. Agrawal, "Effect of gravity balancing on biped 
stability," in Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA'04. 
2004 IEEE International Conference on, 2004, pp. 4228-4233. 
[22] M. W. Whittle, Gait analysis: an introduction, 2003. 
[23] J. L. Herder, "Energy-free systems: theory, conception, and design of 
statically balanced spring mechanisms," Ph.D Thesis, 2001. 
[24] Q. Lu, W. Xiu, and O. Ma, "On the Impedance of Statically-Balanced 
Mechanisms," in ASME 2011 International Design Engineering 
Technical Conferences and Computers and Information in 
Engineering Conference, 2011, pp. 543-550. 
[25] R. A. Paz, J. C. Barajas, and O. Ma, "Autobalancing control for a 
reduced gravity simulator," in Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics 
(AIM), 2013 IEEE/ASME Intl. Conf. on, 2013, pp. 405-410. 
[26] J. Park, "Synthesis of natural arm swing motion in human bipedal 
walking," Journal of biomechanics, vol. 41, pp. 1417-1426, 2008. 
[27] F. Sylos-Labini, Y. P. Ivanenko, G. Cappellini, A. Portone, M. J. 
MacLellan, and F. Lacquaniti, "Changes of Gait Kinematics in 
Different Simulators of Reduced Gravity," Journal of Motor Behavior, 
vol. 45, pp. 495-505, Nov 1, 2013. 
[28] A. E. Minetti, "The biomechanics of skipping gaits: a third locomotion 
paradigm?," Proc Biol Sci, vol. 265, pp. 1227-35, Jul 7, 1998. 
[29] W. Xiu and O. Ma, "Relation between End-Effector Impedance and 
Joint Friction of Statically-Balanced Mechanisms," 6th Annual 
Dynamic Systems and Control Conference, October 21-23, 2013. 
 
4843
