  
? 
Abstract— In this study, we experimentally investigated the 
effect of robot fingertip stiffness on friction during grasping of 
an object. To make robots more human-friendly, robotic hands 
with soft surfaces have been developed. A soft fingertip, i.e., one 
with low stiffness, is considered desirable because it produces 
high friction. However, in our experiments, we were able to 
obtain high friction from a stiff fingertip under a certain 
condition. We initially investigated the maximum resistible force 
when solid objects with different angled surfaces were grasped 
by spherical fingertips of different stiffness. When the contact 
surface was flat, a stiffer fingertip produced larger frictional 
force. When the contact surface was highly convex, the 
maximum frictional force increased with decreasing fingertip 
stiffness. Secondly, we examined the relationships among the 
contact area, the load, and the maximum frictional force. We 
reformulated the relationship between the load and the 
maximum frictional force and, together with our experimental 
results, used it to determine the factor that increased the 
maximum frictional force.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
There have been recent demands for robots that are capable 
of working among humans. The hands of such robots play an 
essential role in supporting human activity and replacing 
humans in the performance of everyday tasks. For robotic 
hands to perform such tasks, planning of the grasp [1] is 
important and several libraries and software have been 
developed for this purpose. Typical examples are Graspit [2], 
Openrave [3], and GraspPlugin for Chorenoid [4]. The 
frictional conditions are important in grasp planning because 
they determine whether the robotic hands would be able to 
grasp the target object. The frictional conditions are based on 
the Amontons-Coulomb friction model. It is valid for contacts 
between solid surfaces. However, a robotic hand cannot 
always produce sufficiently large frictional force for the stable 
grasping of a solid surface. To increase the frictional force 
while also taking affinity for humans into consideration, 
robotic hands with soft fingertips were recently developed [5], 
[6]. In this case, the contact is referred to as soft-finger contact 
[7]. The Amontons-Coulomb model is also considered valid 
for this contact. Unfortunately, it is not true for a fingertip with 
low stiffness [8]. Furthermore, considering that high fingertip 
stiffness affords relatively high manuability and low fingertip 
stiffness produces large frictional forces [9], robotic hands 
with changeable fingertip stiffness have been developed [6], 
[10]. However, the determination of the low fingertip stiffness 
that will produce a large frictional force is intuitive, and it is 
uncertain whether a low fingertip stiffness can actually 
produce large frictional forces. For reasonable grasp planning, 
a more detailed analysis of a soft finger is required. In this 
 
T. Watanabe is with the College of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa 
University, Kakuma-machi,, Kanazawa, 9201192 Japan (corresponding 
author to provide e-mail: te-watanabe@ieee.org).  
study, we investigated the effect of the fingertip stiffness on 
the frictional shear/tangential force. 
Analyses of soft fingers were conducted by Kao et al. [8], 
[11], [12] and Hirai et al. [13], [14]. Xydas and Kao [11] 
presented the relationship between the normal force and the 
radius of the contact area when a semispherical fingertip 
contacts a flat surface, and used it to develop a model of the 
frictional condition. Kao et al. [12] presented the relationship 
between the normal force and the deformation when a 
semispherical fingertip contacts a flat surface. Inoue and Hirai 
presented a model that considered both the normal and the 
tangential deformations. Tiezzi et al [8] presented a model of 
the frictional force and examined the effect of the fingertip 
compliance. Based on their theoretical and experimental 
results, they concluded that, if the fingertip stiffness was low, 
a large frictional force could be applied. However, as we will 
show in this paper, this is not always true. Ho and Hirai 
presented a cantilever model of a soft fingertip, but their 
interest was sliding contact.  
In a study in the field of tribology, the mechanics of the 
contact and friction of rubber were analyzed [15]. However, 
the interest was kinetic friction and not static friction. 
Generally, kinetic friction is more important in the tribology 
field. There have been very few studies on static friction in the 
tribology field. Deladi et al. [16] analyzed the static friction 
between rubber and metal objects. However, the stiffness of 
the materials was not considered. In his dissertation [17], the 
similar numerical and experimental results to Tiezzi et al [8] 
were presented: if the fingertip stiffness was low, a large 
frictional force could be applied. As mentioned above, this is 
not always true. Stiffness was not his main interest issue and 
there is no theoretical analysis on the stiffness. Derler and 
Gerhardt [18] reviewed about friction of human skin, but any 
researches on the stiffness were not found.   
With this in mind, we experimentally investigated the 
effect of fingertip stiffness on frictional force. We examined 
the maximum resistible force when grasping a solid object 
with several angled surfaces by fingertips of varying stiffness. 
We used the results to examine whether the ability of a low 
fingertip stiffness to produce a large resistible force depended 
on the shape of the contact surface. Specifically, under a 
particular condition, the frictional/resistible force increases 
with increasing fingertip stiffness. This phenomenon cannot be 
explained by conventional theories [8], [17] or a model based 
on the Hertz contact theory (for an example, see [19]). The 
resistible force consists of the frictional and (tangential) elastic 
forces, with the shearing frictional force constituting the major 
F. Fujihira is with the Graduated school of Natural science and 
Technology, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, 9201192, 
Japan (e-mail: fuji3134@stu.kanazawa-u.ac.jp). 
Experimental investigation of effect of fingertip stiffness on friction 
while grasping an object 
Tetsuyou Watanabe, Member, IEEE, and Yoshinori Fujihira 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 889
