Magnetic-Based Closed-Loop Control of
Paramagnetic Microparticles using Ultrasound Feedback
Islam S. M. Khalil
1
, Pedro Ferreira
2
, Ricardo Eleut´ erio
2
, Chris L. de Korte
3
and Sarthak Misra
4
Abstract—Controlling the motion of microrobots based on
feedback provided using an imaging modality is essential to
make them clinically viable. In this study, we demonstrate
the wireless magnetic-based motion control of paramagnetic
microparticles using ultrasound feedback. This control is ac-
complished by pulling the microparticles using the magnetic
ﬁeld gradients towards the reference position through feedback
provided by an ultrasound system. First, position of the mi-
croparticles is determined using the ultrasound images. Second,
calibration of the ultrasound-based tracking of microparticles
is achieved and veriﬁed using a calibrated microscopic system.
Third, the feedback provided by the ultrasound system is used
in the implementation of a proportional-derivative magnetic-
based control system. This control system allows us to achieve
point-to-pointcontrolofmicroparticleswithanaverageposition
tracking error of 48±59 ?m, whereas a control system based
on a microscopic system achieves an average position tracking
error of 21±26?m. The positioning accuracy accomplished us-
ingourultrasoundmagnetic-basedcontrolsystemdemonstrates
the ability to control microrobotic systems in situations where
visual feedback cannot be provided via microscopic systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
There exists at least three main challenges that stand
between the utilization of microrobotic systems in magnetic-
based targeted drug delivery. First, realization of wireless
magnetic-based control using feedback provided by a clin-
ical imaging modality [1], [2]. Second, the ability to steer
microrobotsthroughrelativelylargedistancesbypullingwith
the magnetic ﬁeld gradients [3], [4], or moving using self-
propulsion [5]. Third, the ability of magnetic systems and
their controllers to compensate for the time-varying ﬂow
rates [6], [7], surface effects, channel wall effects [8], and
time-varying viscosity in a medium.
Evertsson et al. used a high-frequency ultrasound scan-
ner to evaluate the motion of superparamagnetic iron ox-
ide nanoparticles, by developing an algorithm based on
quadrature detection and phase gating at the frequency of
interest [9], [10]. This algorithm could allow for providing
This work was supported by funds from MIRA–Institute for Biomedical
TechnologyandTechnicalMedicine,UniversityofTwente,TheNetherlands.
1
Islam S. M. Khalil is afﬁliated with the German University in Cairo,
New Cairo City, Egypt islam.shoukry@guc.edu.eg
2
Pedro Ferreira and Ricardo Eleut´ erio are afﬁliated with
the New University of Lisbon, Monte de Caparica, Portugal
pr.ferreira,r.eleuterio@campus.fct.unl.pt
3
Chris L. de Korte is afﬁliated with MUSIC–Medical Ultrasound Imag-
ing Center, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The Netherlands
chris.dekorte@radboudumc.nl
4
Sarthak Misra is afﬁliated with MIRA–Institute for Biomedical Tech-
nology and Technical Medicine, University of Twente, The Netherlands
s.misra@utwente.nl
Fig. 1. Magnetic system with an ultrasound probe, i.e., 18L6 HD (upper-
left inset), for the wireless motion control of paramagnetic microparticles
(PLAParticles-M-redF-plain from Micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH,
Rostock-Warnemuende, Germany). Position of a single microparticle is
determined using an ultrasound system (Siemens ACUSON S2000, Siemens
Healthcare, Mountain View, USA). This position is also determined using
a microscopic system to evaluate the accuracy of the ultrasound-based
motion control of microparticles. The bottom-right inset shows a controlled
microparticle following a sinusoidal trajectory under the inﬂuence of the
controlled magnetic ﬁeld gradients and using ultrasound feedback. The red
circle indicates the microparticle and is assigned by our feature tracking
algorithm [11], whereas the small red and blue circles are way points along
the reference trajectory [12].
feedback and controlling the motion of nanoparticles us-
ing ultrasound feedback. Martel et al. presented a medical
nanorobotic interventional platform that uses a magnetic
resonance imaging for feedback of the position and control
of magnetic drug carriers, nanorobots, and magnetotactic
bacteria in vivo [1]. However, a major disadvantage in using
a magnetic resonance imaging system for tracking and actu-
ation is the possibility of inducing time-delay due to com-
munications and interactions between the various modules
of the interventional platform. This time-delay could cause
instability in the closed-loop control system and possibly
limit the realization of the control system in real-time.
In this work, we demonstrate the closed-loop motion
control of paramagnetic microparticles using an ultrasound
system. Ultrasound has no unfavorable effects on health,
adequate resolution and high frame rates that allow for the
realization of real-time control, and low cost, as opposed to
magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography [3].
We integrate an ultrasound system to our magnetic-based
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3807
Fig. 2. An array of iron-core electromagnetic coils surrounding
a water reservoir. This reservoir contains paramagnetic microparticles
(PLAParticles-M-redF-plain from Micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH,
Rostock-Warnemuende, Germany). Position of the microparticles is deter-
mined using an ultrasound probe (18L6 HD, Siemens Healthcare, Mountain
View, USA) and a microscopic system. Motion control is implemented
based on the feedback provided using the ultrasound probe and compared
to that based on the microscopic system. The microscopic system is also
used to calibrate the ultrasound system and evaluate the accuracy of the
ultrasound feedback.
manipulation system to provide feedback (Fig. 1). This
feedback allows us to implement closed-loop motion control
of microparticles using ultrasound feedback. Further, we
compare the accuracy of the ultrasound-based closed-loop
control to a microscopic-based control system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Section II provides a model of our magnetic system and a
ﬁnite element (FE) simulation of the magnetic ﬁeld gradients
within the workspace of our system. In addition, we calibrate
our ultrasound system and verify this procedure using a
calibrated microscopic system. Closed-loop motion control
of microparticles using ultrasound feedback is provided
in Section III, along with a discussion pertaining to the
control of microparticles using ultrasound feedback. Finally,
SectionIVconcludesandprovidesdirectionsforfuturework.
II. MODELING AND CALIBRATION OF THE
ULTRASOUND-BASED MAGNETIC SYSTEM
Wireless control of paramagnetic microparticles is accom-
plished using an array of iron-core electromagnets and an
ultrasound system. In this section, we model the magnetic
force on the microparticles using an FE model, and calibrate
the ultrasound system.
A. Magnetic System
Motion of the microparticles (PLAParticles-M-redF-
plain from Micromod Partikeltechnologie GmbH, Rostock-
Warnemuende, Germany, with an average diameter of
100 ?m) under the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld gradients
isintheorderofmicrometers.Detectingthismotionusingan
ultrasound probe (18L6 HD, Siemens Healthcare, Mountain
View, USA) shows that it can be easily confused with
undesirable motion artifacts. We observe that these motion
artifacts are reduced by decreasing the distance between
the ultrasound probe and the microparticles. Therefore, the
probe of our ultrasound system (Siemens ACUSON S2000,
Siemens Healthcare, Mountain View, USA) is placed at
25 mm from the center of the workspace of our magnetic
system. The imaging depth is 35 mm. The magnetic system
consists of 3 iron-core electromagnets. The array of electro-
magnets generates a maximum magnetic ﬁeld of 15 mT, and
magneticﬁeldgradientinexcessof60mT/m.Theworkspace
of the electromagnetic arrangement is 2.4?1.8 mm
2
within
the center of the reservoir shown in Fig. 2.
Investigatingtherelationbetweenthemagneticﬁelds,ﬁeld
gradient and the applied current at each of the electro-
magnet is essential for the implementation of a magnetic-
based closed-loop control system. In a prior study using a
conﬁguration of 4 orthogonal electromagnets, we showed
that the relation between magnetic ﬁelds and the current
input is linear for iron-core electromagnets [13]. We further
showed that the magnetic ﬁeld gradients are almost uniform
within the workspace of the 4 electromagnets. Linearity and
uniformity of the magnetic ﬁeld- and ﬁeld gradient-current,
respectively, allows us to simplify the implementation of the
closed-loop control system.
First, magnetic ﬁeld-current linearity of the iron-core
electromagnetsisveriﬁed.Increasinganddecreasingcurrents
areappliedtotheelectromagnet,andthenmagneticﬁeldsare
measured at a representative point within the workspace of
our magnetic system using a calibrated three-axis Hall mag-
netometer (Sentron AG, Digital Teslameter 3MS1-A2D3-2-
2T, Switzerland) [13]. This linearity allows us to calculate
the magnetic ﬁelds generated using the 3 electromagnets
by superposition. Second, we calculate the magnetic ﬁeld
gradients within the workspace of our magnetic system. A
validated FE model of our magnetic system is developed
using Comsol Multiphysics
r
(COMSOL, Inc., Burlington,
U.S.A). Current inputs of 0.1 A, 0.2 A, and 0.3 A are
applied to electromagnets A, B, and C, respectively (Fig. 2).
These currents are devised based on the current limit on
our electromagnets (i.e., 1 A). The calculated magnetic ﬁeld
gradients are shown in Fig. 3. We observe that the magnetic
ﬁeld gradients are almost uniform within our workspace.
We further observe that the conﬁguration of our electro-
magnetic coil provides sufﬁcient pulling magnetic forces in
all directions within the workspace of our magnetic system.
This indicates that our microparticle is controllable within
the workspace. These observations allow us to implement a
closed-loop control system without calculating the magnetic
ﬁeld gradients at each point of the workspace based on a
magnetic force-current map.
The magnetic force (F(P)?R
2?1
) on a microparticle at
point (P?R
2?1
) is given by [14], [15], [16]
F(P)=?(m·B(P)), (1)
3808
(a) Magnetic ﬁeld gradient along x-axis (b) Magnetic ﬁeld gradient along y-axis
Fig. 3. Magnetic ﬁeld gradients within the workspace of our magnetic system for current inputs of 0.1 A, 0.2 A, and 0.3 A at electromagnets A, B,
and C, respectively (Fig. 2). The magnetic ﬁeld gradients are almost uniform, and do not have to be calculated at each point of the workspace during
the implementation of the ultrasound-based or microscopic-based closed-loop control of the microparticles. This simulation result shows that the modiﬁed
conﬁguration of the magnetic system allows microparticles to be pulled in all directions within the workspace of the magnetic system. This modiﬁcation
is done to incorporate the ultrasound probe and provide feedback to the closed-loop control system.
where m ? R
2?1
and B(P) ? R
2?1
are the magnetic
dipolemomentofthemicroparticleandtheinducedmagnetic
ﬁeld, respectively. The ith component of the magnetic force
(F
i
(P)) is given by the following magnetic force-current
map [13]:
F
i
(P)= ?I
T
 
∂(
e
B
T
(P)
e
B(P))
∂i
!
I for i= x,y. (2)
In (2), I ? R
3?1
and
e
B(P) ? R
3?3
are the input current
vector and a matrix that maps current onto magnetic ﬁelds,
respectively. This map is calculated by the superposition of
the contribution of each of the electromagnets based on the
linearity of the magnetic ﬁeld and current. Further, ? is a
magnetic constant and is given by
?,
4
3
1
?
πr
3
p
?
m
, (3)
where r
p
is the radius of a microparticle. Finally, ?
m
and
? are the magnetic susceptibility constant and the magnetic
permeability constant, respectively [14]. The magnetic force-
current map is used in the implementation of a closed-
loop control system of the microparticles based on feedback
obtained using an ultrasound system. This ultrasound system
is calibrated using a microscopic system.
B. Calibration of Ultrasound System
An ultrasound system cannot be calibrated directly from
itsultrasoundimagesusinganobjectwithknowndimensions
because of the undesirable artifacts that often appear in
the ultrasound images. Therefore, we investigate an indirect
method to calibrate our ultrasound system.
The experimental setup provides position feedback using
an ultrasound system and a microscopic system. Although
our closed-loop control is based on feedback provided using
an ultrasound system, the microscopic system is essential
for the calibration of the ultrasound system. First, our
microscopic system is calibrated. The microscopic system
includes a Sony XCD-X710 (Sony Corporation, Tokyo,
Japan) 1024?768 pixels FireWire camera. This camera is
mounted on a Mitutoyo FS70 microscope unit (Mitutoyo,
Kawasaki, Japan) using a Mitutoyo M Plan Apo 2? / 0.055
Objective. The water reservoir is replaced with a marker
plate to determine the absolute orientation and position of
the setup with respect to the camera. This calibration results
in an accuracy of 2.34 ?m per pixel. Second, our ultrasound
system allows for drawing lines with known dimensions.
This option allows us to calculate the microns to pixel ratio
from the ultrasound images. This procedure results in a ratio
of 20.98 ?m per pixel for the ultrasound system. Third, We
verify the correctness of this simple calibration procedure
by simultaneously acquiring the motion of the microparticles
using our calibrated microscopic system and the ultrasound
system. The calibrated ultrasound system is used to provide
feedback to a closed-loop magnetic-based control system.
Parameters of the ultrasound system are included in Table I.
III. MOTION CONTROL RESULTS
Motion control of paramagnetic microparticles is imple-
mented through the magnetic-force current map (2). We de-
vise a proportional-derivative control force (F(P)?R
2?1
)
of the following form [17]:
F(P)=K
p
e+K
d
˙ e, (4)
where K
p
? R
2?2
and K
d
? R
2?2
are the controller
positive-deﬁnite gain matrices. Further, e ? R
2?1
and ˙ e ?
3809
Fig. 4. Magnetic-based closed-loop motion control of a paramagnetic microparticle using ultrasound feedback. The microparticle moves towards the
reference position (blue circle) under the inﬂuence of the magnetic ﬁeld gradients generated using control law (4). Diameter of this microparticle is
approximately 100 ?m. However, the size in the ultrasound image is larger due to artifacts. The microparticle moves at an average speed of 191 ?m/s. The
microparticle starts its motion at the time instant, t = 0.0 seconds, and is positioned within the vicinity of the reference position starting from the time
instant, t = 11.5 seconds. The maximum position tracking error in the steady state is 199 ?m. Please refer to the accompanying video that demonstrates
the point-to-point motion control of a microparticle using ultrasound feedback.
R
2?1
are the position and velocity tracking errors, respec-
tively. These errors are calculated based on the feedback
provided by the ultrasound system. The position tracking
error (e) and velocity tracking error (˙ e) are given by
e=P
us
?P
ref
and ˙ e=
˙
P
us
. (5)
In (5), P
ref
? R
2?1
is a ﬁxed reference position. Further,
P
us
?R
2?1
and
˙
P
us
?R
2?1
are the position and velocity
of the microparticle, respectively. Position of the micropar-
ticle is provided using the ultrasound system, whereas the
velocity is calculated and supplied to the control system.
The control law (4) allows our magnetic system to pull
a microparticle towards the reference position using the
magnetic ﬁeld gradients using ultrasound feedback. A repre-
sentative point-to-point motion control of a microparticle is
shown in Fig. 4. Position of the microparticle is determined
(red circle is assigned by our feature tracking algorithm)
using the ultrasound images and provided to the closed-loop
TABLE I
PARAMETERS OF THE ULTRASOUND SYSTEM (SIEMENS ACUSON
S2000, SIEMENS HEALTHCARE, MOUNTAIN VIEW, USA) USING THE
18L6 HD PROBE. ADVANCED SIECLEAR
TM
: SPATIAL COMPOUNDING
TECHNOLOGY UTILIZES MULTIPLE LINES OF SIGHT TO IMPROVE
CONTRAST RESOLUTION AND BORDER DETECTION. DYNAMIC TISSUE
CONTRAST ENHANCEMENT (TCE)
TM
: PROVIDES ADVANCED SPECKLE
REDUCTION AND COMBINATION WITH ENHANCED CONTRAST
RESOLUTION. EDGE: APPLIES EDGE ENHANCEMENT. SPACE/TIME:
DEFINES SPATIAL RESOLUTION VERSUS TEMPORAL RESOLUTION.
MAPS: SELECTS A PROCESSING CURVE THAT ASSIGNS ECHO
AMPLITUDES TO GRAYSCALE LEVELS. TINT: COLORIZES THE GRAY
SCALE IMAGE.
Advanced Dynamic Edge Space Maps Tint Zoom
Sieclear
TM
TCE
TM
Time
13 High 4 3 D 5 Max.
control system. The magnetic system pulls the microparticle
towards the reference position (small blue circle) by the
magnetic ﬁeld gradients at an average speed of 191 ?m/s.
At time instant, t=11.5 seconds, the microparticle reaches
the reference position and the control system localizes the
microparticle within the vicinity of the reference position.
Anotherrepresentativepoint-to-pointmotioncontrolresult
isshowninFig.5(a).Motionofthemicroparticleisprovided
to the control system to determine the position tracking error
using(5)basedontheultrasoundsystemandthemicroscopic
vision system. The microparticle is controlled at an average
speed of 125 ?m/s and 191 ?m/s using the microscopic
and ultrasound feedback, respectively. We observe that the
magnetic-based control system achieves maximum position
tracking error of 199 ?m in the steady-state using ultrasound
feedback. For the same controller gains, maximum position
tracking error of 79 ?m is achieved using microscopic
feedback (Fig. 5(b)). We attribute the difference in the posi-
tioning accuracy between the ultrasound- and microscopic-
guided magnetic-based control to the accuracy of the feature
tracking of each imaging systems. We use similar feature
tracking algorithm [11] to determine the position of the
microparticle from images acquired from the ultrasound and
the microscopic systems (Section II-B). Please refer to the
accompanying video that demonstrates the point-to-point
motion control of a microparticle using ultrasound feedback.
In order to demonstrate that the conﬁguration of the elec-
tromagnetic coils allows the microparticles to be controlled
within the entire workspace, we devise different trajectories
as shown in Fig. 6. Motion control using ultrasound and
microscopicfeedbackisdonebyprovidingway-points(black
circles) to the control system. We observe that the controlled
microparticles follows a sinusoidal trajectory at an average
speed of 94 ?m/s and 90 ?m/s using the ultrasound and mi-
croscopic feedback, respectively (Fig. 6(a)). Fig. 6(b) shows
an ultrasound- and microscopic-guided magnetic-based con-
trol of an s-trajectory using 6 way points. The controlled
3810
1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
x [mm]
y [mm]
Ultrasound feedback
Microscopic feedback
(a) Path of the controlled microparticle
0 5 10 15 20
1
1.5
2
Time [s]
x [mm]
0 5 10 15 20
0.5
1
1.5
2
Time [s]
y [mm]
Reference
Ultrasound feedback
Microscopic feedback
(b) Position of the microparticle along x- and y-axis
Fig. 5. Motion control of a paramagnetic microparticle based on the feedback provided by an ultrasound system and a microscopic system. (a) The
average speed of the controlled microparticle using ultrasound and microscopic feedback is 125 ?m/s and 191 ?m/s, respectively. The small black circle
represents the reference position. (b) In the steady-state, the maximum position tracking error is 199 ?m and 79 ?m using ultrasound and microscopic
feedback, respectively. Please refer to the accompanying video that demonstrates the point-to-point motion control of a microparticle using ultrasound
feedback and the tracked motion using the microscopic system.
microparticle follows this trajectory at an average speed of
115?m/sand113?m/susingtheultrasoundandmicroscopic
feedback, respectively. Finally, we demonstrate the motion
control of a zig-zag trajectory (Fig. 6(b)) at an average
speed of 279 ?m/s and 206 ?m/s using the ultrasound and
microscopic feedback, respectively. The deviation between
the average speeds calculated based on the ultrasound- and
microscopic-based control systems is due to the undesirable
motion artifacts that are often observed in the ultrasound im-
ages. The averages are calculated from 5 closed-loop motion
control trials for each feedback system. Table II includes the
results of the closed-loop motion control of microparticles.
Pleaserefertotheaccompanyingvideothatdemonstratesthe
control of a microparticle using ultrasound feedback and the
tracked motion using the microscopic system.
Positioningaccuracyofthemicroscopic-basedcontrolsys-
tem is approximately 52% better than that of the ultrasound-
based control system. We attribute this difference to 2 as-
pects, i.e., the microns to pixel ratio and the undesirable mo-
tion artifacts. Calibration of the microscopic and ultrasound
system shows that the former provides 2.34 ?m per pixel,
whereas the later provides 20.98 ?m per pixel. Unlike the
feedback provided by the microscopic system, the ultrasound
feedback is distorted by the artifacts that limits the accuracy
of our closed-loop motion control system. A microparticle
with a diameter of 53 ?m appears as a bright spot with
a diameter of 608 ?m using the ultrasound parameters
provided in Table I. These parameters are adjusted online
to distinguish between microparticles and the undesirable
artifacts, and to increase the brightness of the microparticles
within the workspace. Due to these inevitable artifacts,
accuracy of the ultrasound-based control is evaluated by
a microscopic system. The motion control is implemented
based on the feedback provided by the ultrasound system,
and motion of the controlled microparticles is also deter-
mined using the microscopic system to validate the accuracy
of the ultrasound-based closed-loop control system.
TABLE II
AVERAGE VELOCITIES AND MAXIMUM POSITION TRACKING ERRORS OF
THE CONTROLLED MICROPARTICLES USING MICROSCOPIC AND
ULTRASOUND FEEDBACK. VELOCITIES ARE CALCULATED FOR AN
S-TRAJECTORY, A ZIG-ZAG TRAJECTORY, AND A SINUSOIDAL
TRAJECTORY.
Trajectory Feedback Axis Average velocity Error
(?m/s) (?m)
Sinusoidal Microscope x 84.6±40.2 29.1
y 31.3±22.6 63.4
Absolute 90.2±41.5 71.6
Ultrasound x 87.6±65.1 25.8
y 34.7±32.6 57.6
Absolute 94.4±66.1 64.7
S Microscope x 108.1±55.4 10.2
y 33.8±33.1 38.3
Absolute 113.3±51.7 25.9
Ultrasound x 104.8±81.4 11.1
y 46.4±40.2 30.7
Absolute 114.6±77.8 22.0
Zig-zag Microscope x 185.2±63.0 23.6
y 89.9±44.4 55.0
Absolute 205.8±67.4 59.8
Ultrasound x 235.0±201.1 10.1
y 150.9±136.9 23.5
Absolute 279.3±220.5 25.6
3811
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
x [mm]
y [mm]
Ultrasound feedback
Microscopic feedback
(a) Sinusoidal trajectory
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
x [mm]
y [mm]
Ultrasound feedback
Microscopic feedback
(b) S-trajectory
0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
x [mm]
y [mm]
Ultrasound feedback
Microscopic feedback
(c) Zig-zag trajectory
Fig. 6. Motion control of a paramagnetic microparticle based on the feedback provided by an ultrasound system and a microscopic system. Way points
(black circles) are provided to the control system to deﬁne the trajectory. (a) Controlled microparticle following a sinusoidal trajectory at average speeds
of 94 ?m/s and 90 ?m/s for the ultrasound- and microscopic-based control, respectively. (b) Controlled microparticle following an s-trajectory at average
speeds of 115 ?m/s and 113 ?m/s for the ultrasound- and microscopic-based control, respectively. (c) Controlled microparticle following a zig-zag trajectory
at average speeds of 279 ?m/s and 206 ?m/s for the ultrasound- and microscopic-based control, respectively. Please refer to the accompanying video that
demonstrates the point-to-point motion control of a microparticle using ultrasound feedback and the tracked motion using the microscopic system.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Wireless magnetic-based motion control of paramagnetic
microparticlesisachievedusingultrasoundfeedback.Amag-
netic system is adapted to provide feedback from an ultra-
sound system and a microscopic system. This adaptation al-
lowsustoachievepoint-to-pointmotioncontrolofmicropar-
ticles based on the feedback provided by the ultrasound
system. Furthermore, it allows us to evaluate the accuracy of
the ultrasound-based control system using the microscopic-
based controller. Despite the inevitable motion artifacts we
obtain in the ultrasound feedback, the motion control system
achieves point-to-point motion control at an average speed
and average position tracking error of 191 ?m/s and 48 ?m
using ultrasound feedback, respectively.
As part of future work, a three-dimensional (3D) mag-
netic system will be modiﬁed to provide feedback from an
ultrasound system. This modiﬁcation will allow us to control
paramagnetic microparticles and microrobots in 3D space
using ultrasound feedback. Furthermore, motion control of
microparticles and nanoparticles will be achieved in ﬂuidic
microchannels with time-varying ﬂow rates [6], [8] based on
the feedback provided by the ultrasound system.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Martel, O. Felfoul, J.-B. Mathieu, A. Chanu, S. Tamaz, M. Mo-
hammadi, M. Mankiewicz, and N. Tabatabaei, “MRI-based medical
nanorobotic platform for the control of magnetic nanoparticles and
ﬂagellated bacteria for target interventions in human capillaries,”
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1169-
1182, September 2009.
[2] J.-B. Mathieu and S. Martel, “Steering of aggregating magnetic
microparticles using propulsion gradients coils in an MRI scanner,”
Magnetic Resonance in Medicine, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1336-1345,
May 2010.
[3] B. J. Nelson, I. K. Kaliakatsos, and J. J. Abbott, “Microrobots for min-
imally invasive medicine,” Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 12, pp. 55-85, April 2010.
[4] M. P. Kummer, J. J. Abbott, B. E. Kartochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul,
and B. J. Nelson, “OctoMag: an electromagnetic system for 5-DOF
wireless micromanipulation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 1006-1017, December 2010.
[5] J. Wang and W. Gao, “Nano/microscale motors: biomedical oppor-
tunities and challenges,” ACS Nano, vol. 6, no. 7, pp. 5745-5751,
July 2012.
[6] S. Sanchez, A. A. Solovev, S. M. Harazim, and O. G. Schmidt, “Mi-
crorobots swimming in the ﬂowing streams of microﬂuidic channels,”
Journal of the American Chemical Society, vol. 133, no. 4, pp. 701-
703, December 2010.
[7] I. S. M. Khalil, V. Magdanz, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt, and
S. Misra, “Control of self-propelled microjets inside a microchan-
nel with time-varying ﬂow rates,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics.
DOI:10.1109/TRO.2013.2281557. In Press
[8] I. S. M. Khalil, M. P. Pichel, O. S. Sukas, L. Abelmann, and S. Misra,
“Control of magnetotactic bacterium in a micro-fabricated maze,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 5488-5493, Karlsruhe, Germany, May 2013.
[9] M. Evertsson, M. Cinthio, S. Fredriksson, F. Olsson, H. W. Pers-
son, and T. Jansson, “Frequency- and phase-sensitive magnetomotive
ultrasound imaging of superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles,”
in IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency
Control, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 481–491, March 2013.
[10] J. Weizenecker, B. Gleich, J. Rahmer, H. Dahnke, and J. Borgert,
“Three-dimensional real-time in vivo magnetic particle imaging,”
PhysicsinMedicineandBiology,vol.54,no.5,pp.1–10,March2009.
[11] J. D. Keuning, J. de Vries, L. Abelmann, and S. Misra, “Image-
based magnetic control of paramagnetic microparticles in water,” in
ProceedingsoftheIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceofRoboticsand
Systems (IROS), pp. 421-426, San Francisco, USA, September 2011.
[12] I. S. M. Khalil, J. D. Keuning, L. Abelmann, and S. Misra, “Wireless
magnetic-based control of paramagnetic microparticles,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE RAS/EMBS International Conference on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), pp. 460-466, Rome, Italy,
June 2012.
[13] I.S.M.Khalil,R.M.P.Metz,L.Abelmann,andS.Misra,“Interaction
force estimation during manipulation of microparticles,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE International Conference of Robotics and Systems
(IROS), pp. 950-956, Vilamoura, Portugal, October 2012.
[14] D. Jiles, ”Introduction to magnetism and magnetic materials”, Taylor
& Francis, 1998.
[15] T. H. Boyer, “The force on a magnetic dipole,” American Journal of
Physics, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 688-692, August 1988.
[16] S. S. Shevkoplyas, A. C. Siegel, R. M. Westervelt, M. G. Pren-
tiss, and G. M. Whitesides, “The force acting on a superparamagnetic
bead due to an applied magnetic ﬁeld,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 7, no. 6,
pp. 1294-1302, July 2007.
[17] I. S. M. Khalil, V. Magdanz, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt, L. Abelmann
and S. Misra, “Magnetic control of potential microrobotic drug deliv-
ery systems: nanoparticles, magnetotactic bacteria and self-propelled
microjets,” in Proceedings of the International Conference of the IEEE
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC),pp.5299-5302,
Osaka, Japan, July 2013.
3812
