  
? 
Abstract—This paper describes a methodology for capturing 
the tacit knowledge of the manual grinding and polishing 
process. Key Process Variables (KPVs) i.e. contact force, tool 
path, feed rate, etc. of the manual operator performing the task 
are captured with a ‘sensorised’ hand-held belt grinder, while 
the changes to the work-piece geometry is captured using a 3-D 
laser scanner. These KPVs are fed into an analytical material 
removal model to generate a material removal profile, which 
can then be calibrated using the actual material removed 
determined from the manual surface finishing process. The 
skill of the surface finishing skill is encapsulated in this 
material removal model and reduces the need for costly robotic 
Design of Experiment (DoE) trials with test coupons to develop 
empirical material removal models. Parts from the production 
process require different processing variables, but the common 
objective is to generate various material removal maps in order 
to manufacture a part of a desired form and dimension. The 
metal removal rate (MRR) model could then be utilized by the 
industrial robot to determine suitable polishing parameters to 
accomplish the polishing task. The characteristics of the skilled 
worker’s captured motions can then be extracted and used for 
optimization of the industrial robot polishing tool path. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Many surface finishing tasks such as the grinding of free-
form surfaces to tolerance are still performed manually with a 
hand-held flexible belt grinder. Parts that are sent for surface 
finishing may have slight variations in their initial geometry. 
Thus, for every part to achieve dimensional conformance and 
meet the required surface roughness, different grinding 
parameters and tool paths have to be used for each part or 
work-piece. The manual operator has a wealth of experience 
and can adapt to variations in the inputs and determine 
suitable grinding tool paths and parameters to produce the 
desired output, which is a part that is within tolerance. 
However, these surface finishing tasks are potentially 
hazardous to health if too much metallic dust is inhaled when 
the proper protective equipment is not used.  Furthermore, 
manual processes may be prone to human errors, resulting in 
the part having to be scrapped or sent for rework. Therefore, 
it is desirable for these manual surface finishing tasks to be 
automated with an industrial robot. 
One of the first steps in the conversion of a manual to 
automated process is the development of an empirical 
material removal model for the work-piece to be finished. A 
 
*Research supported by Rolls-Royce and Singapore EDB IPP Program. 
W. X. Ng is with the Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 
(phone: 65-240-3157; e-mail: ngwu0003@e.ntu.edu.sg). 
W. K. Teo and H. K. Chan are with Rolls-Royce Singapore (email: 
wee.teo@rolls-royce.com and kelvin.chan@rolls-royce.com)   
I. M. Chen, is an Associate Professor with the Nanyang Technological 
University, Singapore. (e-mail: michen@ntu.edu.sg). 
 
flat test piece coupon may be first used to determine the 
parameters required for constant material removal of a certain 
thickness. Next, the parameters will be optimized for constant 
material removal over the actual work-piece geometry by 
conducting trials on a test piece that represents the geometry 
of the work-piece. The differences in the contact pressure due 
to the curvatures of the work-piece has to be accounted for by 
tweaking variables such as the step over distance of the tool 
path and the feed rate. The disadvantage of this approach is 
that it is time consuming and also an expensive process. 
Many DoE trials involving robot programming and 
consumables such as test coupons and abrasive belts have to 
be completed in order to obtain the relationship between the 
Key Process Variables (KPVs) and Material Removal Rate 
(MRR) [1].  
This paper presents a novel method to capture the 
relationship between the KPVs and the MRR accurately 
without the need for costly robotic trials and DoE. The 
flexible hand-held belt grinder used by the manual operators 
for the surface finishing process is integrated with sensors 
and infra-red markers to capture the contact force, feed rate 
and tool paths. The capturing process can be carried out 
while the operator performs the surface finishing process on 
the production shop floor by utilizing the ‘sensorized’ belt 
grinder. A 3D laser scanner would also be used to capture the 
changes in the work-piece geometry when the operator stops 
to inspect the part. The data collected from the ‘sensorized’ 
tool would be fed into an analytical material removal model 
[2-4] to calculate a material removal map. The experimental 
material removal map can then be generated from the 3D data 
captured by the laser scanner of the actual manual process. 
The analytical model can then be calibrated by fitting the 
predicted material removal map generated by the analytical 
model against the actual material removal map captured from 
the manual process.  
With the captured data of the manual operator converted 
to the form of a model relating the KPVs to the MRR, the 
robot programmer can easily use this information to decide 
the required parameters based on the desired amount of 
material to be removed. This eliminates the need for guess 
work when deciding the required parameters and produce 
cost savings on the purchase of consumables since robotic 
trials on flat or curved test coupons do not need to be carried 
out in order to develop the material removal model. The 
relationship between the depth of material removed and the 
surface finishing KPVs can be obtained directly from the 
manual operator during the production process. This 
information was previously lost as there was no method of 
capturing the KPVs of the manual surface finishing process. 
 
A Method for Capturing the Tacit Knowledge in the Surface 
Finishing Skill by Demonstration for Programming a Robot* 
Charles. W. X. Ng, Kelvin. H. K. Chan, W. K. Teo, I-Ming. Chen 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1374
  
Previous work on optimizing path planning for robotic 
belt grinding do not take into account the tacit knowledge of 
the manual operator and are based more on the experience of 
the robot programmers [5, 6]. Thus, this paper also presents a 
method of using the captured manual tool path using a 
‘sensorized’ tool to optimize the method of translating a 
manual to robotic process. This is done by extracting features 
from multiple demonstrations of the manual motions and 
converting it to its equivalent robotic KPVs (step-over 
distance, coverage area, etc), while the theoretical model can 
be used to calculate the required parameters in order to 
achieve the desired material removal map for each work-
piece, since there may be variations in the parts coming 
through the production process. Porting the manual tool path 
trajectories and contact forces directly to the robot will not 
guarantee that the work-piece geometry and surface finish 
will be within tolerance. This is because the operator would 
vary the tool path in each cycle to adapt to the requirements 
of the individual work-piece based on the information 
gathered from his senses. On the other hand, the robot is 
blind and does not have a closed loop feedback system.  
  
II. CAPTURING THE KPVS OF THE MANUAL PROCESS 
A. Capture Equipment and System 
Sensors for measuring the KPVs of the material removal 
process will have to be integrated with the hand-held belt 
grinder used by the manual polisher. The mounting side of 
the 6 degree of freedom ATI force/torque sensor is attached 
to the end of the belt grinder’s contact arm (Figure 1).  
    
A shaft is attached to the end effector attachment side of 
the force/torque sensor, where the contact wheel is attached. 
Active LEDs are attached to the belt grinder and work-piece 
to capture the position, velocity and orientation of the Tool 
Centre Point (TCP) using a Nikon K600 optical CMM. A 
tachometer is also integrated to measure the spindle speed of 
the contact wheel. 
 
A laser scanner is also required to sample the 3 
dimensional surface of the work-piece after each grinding 
correction cycle of the manual operator. The laser scanner 
(Figure 2) is also tracked by the Nikon K600 optical CMM to 
reconstruct the point cloud of the surface.  
 
B. Determining the Contact Force and TCP 
The contact force of the belt grinder on the surface of the 
work-piece can be modeled as a point force acting on the 
shaft at a location in the centre of the bearing (Figure 3). At 
the origin of the ATI sensor, this point force will be 
equivalent to a force of the same magnitude and direction, as 
well as a moment due to the offset of the force from the 
origin. 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
The friction force which is a fraction of the contact force 
F, applied on the surface of the workpiece is assumed to be 
small compared to the contact force mesured by the ATI 
sensor. In calculating the contact force, it is also assumed 
that the contact wheel is normal to the surface of the 
workpiece. Thus, the contact force is 
 
 
 √ 
 
 
  
 
 
.         (1) 
This can be validated by using the position data of the 
belt grinder Tool Centre Point (TCP) and workpiece 
captured with the optical infra-red cameras to visualise the 
manual tool path. Thus the approach vector of the belt 
grinder can be compared with the actual normal vector to the 
workpiece surface. In Figure 4, the red vectors show the 
approach angle of the tool while the blue vectors indicate the 
normal of the workpiece surface at the tool contact point. 
 
The tool centre point on the belt grinder is not fixed but 
can be at any position along the the circumference of the 
contact wheel. Figure 3 shows the xy-axes plane of the ATI 
sensor. To determine the contact point along the 
circumference of the wheel, the magnitude of the force along 
the x and y axes are added vectorially at every time step, 
where the angle direction of the force in the xy plane 
corresponds to the position of the contact point along the 
wheel circumference. Thus, the angle of the force direction 
is 
Figure 1.Sensorized Tool 
 
Figure 2. Handheld 3D laser from Nikon (K-Scan MMDx) 
 
www.nikonmetrology.com    
Figure 4. Visualization of captured TCP 
 
z-axis 
d
1
 
F 
friction 
F 
? =F.d 
x-axis 
y-axis 
Figure 3. Calculation of Contact Force  
 
y-axis 
Force/Torque sensor 
Optical RPM sensor 
1375
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 .        (2) 
It is important to note the sign of the force vectors to 
determine the quadrant where the angle direction lies.  
   
 
     ( 
 
 
),       (3) 
   
 
     ( 
 
 
),       (4) 
where R is the radius of the contact wheel. This is then 
used to calculate the coordinate point where the tool is in 
contact with the workpiece surface. With the other end of the 
vector being the coordinate point of the contact wheel shaft 
centre, the approach vector is constructed. Let position of the 
hand held grinder tool relative to the global origin be 
represented by the homogeneous transformation matrice  
 
 
. 
The homogenous matrice representing the position and 
orientation of the workpiece relative to the global origin is 
 
 
 
. Thus, the homogeneous matrice of the tool relative to 
the workpiece,  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
.        (5) 
Position/Orientation of the origin of the integrated 
force/torque sensor relative to the workpiece becomes, 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
,        (6) 
where  
 
 
 is the homogenous transformation matrice 
between the origin of the LED infra-red markers and the 
force/torque sensor origin. Location of the instantaneous 
contact point between the tool and the workpiece is 
 
   
 
  
 
 
(
   
   
   
   
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
) ,     (7) 
where    
 
 and    
 
 are obtained from (3) and (4). 
Hence, the 3-by-1 approach direction of the instantaneous 
tool centre point is calculated by subtracting the position 
component of  
   
 
and  
 
 
, followed by dividing by the 
norm of the distance between them. The translation 
component of the entire collection of  
   
 
 homogenous 
matrices represent the tool path of the manual operator. 
 
C. Calculating the Surface Finishing KPVs and Trajectories 
The target points of the manual operator’s surface 
finishing strategy have to be converted into KPVs which can 
be utilized by the robot programmer in the development of 
the automation strategy. The KPVs that need to be calculated 
are the cutting speed, feed rate, contact force and the 
orientation of the wheel head relative to the tool path 
direction. The cutting speed can be estimated from the 
specifications of the pneumatic belt grinder. Alternatively, an 
rpm sensor can be attached to the belt grinder to record the 
instantaneous cutting speed. The time discretized feed rate is 
calculated based on the distance between each target point 
sampled and the interval sample time. The contact force 
magnitude of the manual strategy is calculated from the 
forces in the x and y axes recorded by the ATI sensor. To 
calculate the orientation angle of the belt polisher, the tangent 
to the tool path (where the tool path is represented by the 
collection of discretized tool contact points) is first calculated 
for every target point. The orientation of the belt grinder is 
directly determined from the optical infra-red camera tracker. 
Lastly, the angle between the orientation of the contact wheel 
and the tool path direction is then calculated with a dot 
product. 
 
III. CALIBRATION OF THE MATERIAL REMOVAL MODEL 
A. Simulating the Human Environment Interaction 
The environment is the work-piece, while the interaction 
refers to surface finishing. In order to generalize the captured 
data from the manual surface finishing process, a theoretical 
material removal model is utilized to simulate the material 
removal map based on the captured KPVs. This is because 
the captured data alone may be of limited use, as the work-
pieces in the production process may vary from part to part. 
Hence, the parameters used by the manual operator, such as 
the forces, feed rate or number of passes for a certain part 
will not be applicable to the next one. In addition, the tool 
path captured may have subtle techniques used by the 
operator that are not replicable by the robot. 
 
    
Therefore, a theoretical or analytical material removal 
model [3, 4, 7] is a very suitable tool to interpret the captured 
KPVs in terms of a material removal map and present the 
relationship between the KPVs captured from the manual 
operator and the amount or depth of material removed per 
unit length, which is the tool impression function  
   
 
This way, the programmer would be able to use the 
relationship between the KPVs and material removal to 
program the robot as it is in the form of robot parameters (i.e. 
feed-rate, contact force etc).  
DoE trials which are used currently to determine the 
relation between the robotic KPVs and MRR may also be 
eliminated. These trials may be costly as they require time to 
program and to set up the robot tool path and robot cell 
before linishing of the work-pieces are carried out, as well as 
money to purchase consumables such as test coupons, 
coolant and abrasive belts. Furthermore, time is needed to 
measure the depth of material removed using a GOM ATOS 
3D scanner (www.gom.com) or ultrasonic sensor. 
 
B.  The Theoretical Material Removal Map 
Based on the Hertzian contact stress model to simulate 
the pressure distribution (Figure 5), the MRR model can be 
developed based on the Archard wear law  to calculate the 
tool impression function, which is the depth of material 
removed from the surface for one unit time of tool dwell. 
According to the Hertzian model, the contact area between 
the part and the polishing tool is an ellipse that depends on 
Figure 5. Modeling of Contact Pressure 
Figure 5. Modeling of Contact Pressure 
1376
  
the local radius of curvature of the part, assuming a constant 
compressive force. In order to model the material removal 
over the three dimensional free-form surfaces, the tool 
impression function is convoluted with the captured tool path 
of the manual operator [3]. Some results of this model are 
presented in Figure 6, where the predicted material removal 
maps of two robotic paths are shown. The model will be 
similarly applied to the human tool paths captured. 
 
  
Figure 6a shows the actual shape of the linished surface 
measured by a GOM 3D scanner. Figure 6b shows the 
predicted final shape of the linished surface with the same 
input KPVs as the actual trial carried out. The general 
pattern can be observed to be similar, however, differences 
arises in the peak to valley heights. KPVs of the surface 
finishing process are  fed into the theoretical model to 
generate the material removal map for a free-form surface 
shown in Figure 7, where the colors indicate different depths 
of material removed. 
 
The tool path is first obtained from a CAD/CAM software 
comprising of a list of xyz coordinates. The first step is to use 
these points to fit a surface given the x, y and z points using 
the gridfit Matlab function. This returns a 2 dimensional 
array,  
   
 of values corresponding to the height map of the 
fitted surface. Next, the maximum and minimum principal 
curvatures are calculated using the surfature Matlab function. 
The list of tool paths are next rounded to the nearest 
discretized position on the surface. The discretized tool paths, 
         
   
 (k is the number of tool path xyz coordinates) 
is then compared with the x and y array values of  
   
, 
 
     
 from 1 to n, and  
     
 from 1 to m. The tool 
impression function,  
   
 can be calculated for every tool 
path coordinate point using the equation 
 
 
      
 
   
    
 
     
 
 
  
 
     
 
              .  (8) 
Where the contact pressure, 
  
 
         
 
√  (
 
 
 
)
 
 (
 
 
 
)
 
          , (9) 
      
 
 
           (|
  
 
|),    (10)  
and V is the nominal spindle speed, V
f
 is the feed speed of the 
tool, H
v
 is the hardness of the part surface, K
abr
 the cutting 
parameter of the abrasive belt, Dist is the distance between 
two coordinate points, a and b are the semi-major and minor 
axes of the contact ellipse which depends on the radius of 
curvature of the work piece. The material removal map can 
be determined by a convolution of the depth map  
 
with the 
discretized tool path points. 
 
C. Capturing the Experimental Material Removal Map 
The experimental material removal map can be captured 
using a Nikon K-Scan MMDx walkaround scanning. The 
laser scanner is tracked by the Nikon K600 optical CMM, 
which enables three dimensional CAD data of the work-piece 
surface to be measured. The manual operator’s surface 
finishing strategy consists of multiple correction cycles; each 
cycle involves grinding of the surface of the work-piece and 
inspecting the surface visually and by touch. This forms a 
closed loop system, ensuring that the final work-piece will be 
within dimensional tolerance. In each correction cycle, the 
Nikon K600 optical CMM will track the position of the hand-
held belt grinder used by the operator. The K-Scan MMDx, 
which is also tracked by the Nikon K600, will be used to 
sample the surface of the work-piece each time the operator 
stops to inspect the surface. The difference between the 
surfaces scanned between each correction cycle can be 
determined using Polyworks
TM
 software to derive the 
material removal map. 
 
D. Determining the Unknown Parameters 
The theoretical material removal model has several 
unknown parameters, such as a value K
abr
 to represent the 
cutting effectiveness of the abrasive belt, or the effect of the 
contact wheel serrations (land to groove ratio, serration 
angle) on the contact pressure. The experimental material 
removal map captured with the laser scanner can be used to 
calibrate the predicted material removal map generated from 
the theoretical model by choosing values of these unknown 
parameters heuristically such that the two material removal 
maps will be aligned. With the unknown parameters 
obtained, the material removal model can be used for other 
work-pieces which may have different geometries. 
As a consequence, the belt wear can also be determined 
as it is related to the cutting effectiveness constant in the 
theoretical model. At the end of each correction cycle, 
variable parameters such as the cutting effectiveness can be 
determined by re-calibrating the theoretical material removal 
map with the experimental map. This is due to the belt wear, 
as the cutting grains on the belt become blunt, the cutting 
effectiveness would fall, resulting in a corresponding drop in 
this parameter. By assuming a linear relationship between the 
length of the tool path and the cutting effectiveness constant, 
the rate of the belt wear can be determined between each 
calibration. 
Figure 7.  Material removal maps for a convex free-form surface, 
given the robotic surface finishing KPVs. 
 
 
6b 
6a 
Figure 6. Material removal map validation. 
1377
  
 
IV. ROBOT TEACHING TOOL FOR SURFACE FINISHING 
A. Differences between the Manual and Robotic Strategy 
In the manual surface finishing strategy, there are 
multiple correction cycles. The manual operator corrects for 
the form errors in the work-piece by adjusting the number of 
grinding passes over the surface until the error is within the 
acceptable range. On the other hand, the robotic strategy for 
correcting the form errors over the surface of the work-piece 
typically involves only one pass, while the feed speed or 
contact force can be adjusted to remove different depths of 
material spatially. This is the fundamental difference between 
the manual and robotic strategy, and is a consequence of the 
different capabilities of the robot and a human. Because the 
robot typically uses one pass, the contact force applied on the 
work-piece would be significantly greater than those applied 
by the manual operator. The life of the abrasive belt can be 
extended on the robotic process as greater forces can be 
achieved in order to produce the same rate of material 
removal.  
 
The industrial robot is able to control the feed rate and 
position of the belt-grinder finely while the manual operator 
can never reach the same accuracy and repeatability. The 
operating force of the robot is also significantly higher than 
the maximum forces the manual operator can attain. 
However, the manual operator is a lot more dexterous than 
the industrial robot. Errors arise when the robot transitions 
from position to force control, as well as when it disengages 
the surface and lifts off. In addition, it takes time to transition 
from one control scheme to another. Hence, it is impractical 
to have the robot program that mimics the exact manual 
strategy of having multiple but discontinuous passes, as it 
would involve many control transitions. It is also impractical 
to directly implement the organic motions of the manual 
operator into the robot program, as the robot has different 
mass and inertia properties from the human. As a result, the 
dynamic motion of the robot may not be similar to that of the 
manual operator performing the manual tool path but jerky 
and undesirable. Thus, a local regression using weighted 
linear least squares smoothening of the captured tool path 
was performed before porting the simple grinding tool path to 
the robot (Figure 8).  
B. Benefits of Modeling the Manual Surface Finishing with 
a Theoretical Material Removal Model 
In order to utilize the data captured from the manual 
surface finishing strategy to program an industrial robot, the 
manual surface finishing process has to be modeled for a 
number of reasons. Firstly, the length of the handheld 
grinder’s abrasive belt used by the manual operator is 
significantly shorter than that of the grinder attached to the 
robot end-effector. Thus, the rate of belt wear will be 
different, and even if the same parameters are ported over, 
there would not be a similar result observed, and the work 
piece will not have the desired geometry or finish. 
Furthermore, differences between the size and properties of 
the handheld grinder and robot head grinder’s contact wheel 
limits the use of the captured data from the manual process in 
the robotic surface finishing program.  
Hence, a method to correct for these differences is needed 
in order for the captured manual data to be applicable in the 
robotic environment. Therefore, the material removal model 
was introduced to account for the difference in belt wear and 
contact wheel diameter. The contact pressure from the 
different contact wheel sizes can be calculated, thus other 
KPVs such as the contact force can be adjusted to maintain 
the same contact pressure from the manual to robotic tool 
path. Also, the change in belt abrasiveness can be quantified 
through the use of a parameter in the theoretical material 
removal model. As a result, the belt wear can be monitored 
by tracking the contact wheel revolutions per minute and the 
length of the belt. Other parameters such as the contact force 
can then be tweaked in order to factor for the difference in 
belt wear rate between the manual and robotic approach.  
The table 1 below summarizes the benefits of using 
theoretical model versus an empirical model to determine the 
relationship between the depth of material removed and the 
surface finishing KPVs. 
TABLE I.  THEORETICAL VS EMPIRICAL MATERIAL REMOVAL MODEL 
No. Theoretical Empirical 
Advantages 
1 
Based on fundamental 
physical principles. Low cost. 
Based on experimental data. 
Costly. 
2 
Wide range of applicability. 
(Freeform surfaces, different 
materials etc) 
Applicable only to the range 
conducted in the experimental 
data. 
3 
Quick simulation and 
prediction of material 
removal. 
New models for new products 
require long development by 
accumulating of trial data. 
4 
Predicted spatial material 
removal can be displayed 
visually with high resolution. 
Generally only predicts 
constant material removal. 
Not possible to visualize. 
Disadvantages 
1 
Needs to be calibrated as not 
all parameters in the model 
are known 
Do not require calibration as it 
is inherently based on actual 
data. 
2 
Cannot be applied for very 
fine, detailed shapes where 
contact pressure is unkown. 
A new empirical model can be 
developed even for fine, 
detailed shapes 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
The new method is an enabler for robotic programmers, 
as it provides a whole package of quantitative information on 
the current manual process for the programmer to use in 
developing the robotic tool path strategy. This information 
includes visualization of the manual tool paths, features of 
the manual surface finishing process and their equivalent 
robotic surface finishing KPVs. In addition, expensive 
Figure 8. Program to port motions from a human demonstration to 
robotic system 
 
‘Sensorised’    
 tool 
Robot grinder 
Work-piece 
1378
  
robotic trials can be avoided as the relationship between the 
robotic KPVs and material removal depth can be determined 
directly from the manual process with the aid of a theoretical 
material removal model. Consequently, this method of 
capturing the manual surface finishing skill to program the 
industrial robot not only reduces the time taken to automate a 
manual process by enabling the robot programmer with a set 
of working KPVs from the start for further optimization, but 
also save on developmental costs by reducing the amount of 
consumables needed to develop a material removal model for 
the specific work piece.  
The flow chart in Figure 9 shows a summary of the 
method described in the paper.  
 
VI. FUTURE WORK 
It is not feasible for the robot to follow the manual 
operator’s tool paths exactly for more complex area material 
removal maps due to the fundamental difference between a 
robot and human. To overcome this problem, the robotic tool 
path planning will be done in a CAM software. The tool 
paths generated are structured robotic strategies (zig-zag 
paths that cover the entire material removal map area) which 
the robot can follow. Parameters of the generated tool path, 
such as the step over, can also be easily changed. In addition 
to determining the relationship of the depth of material 
removal to the KPVs, parameters such as the frequency, 
amplitude and direction of motion can also be extracted from 
the captured manual operator’s tool path [8]. With the contact 
force and step over distance fixed, the feed rate can be 
adjusted [9] based on the calibrated analytical material 
removal model to ensure the same material removal map is 
generated as the manual operator. Given that all the input 
workpiece is within a certain tolerance, and that the captured 
manual material removal map has been proven to be the same 
for different workpieces and operators, the robotic strategy 
with the KPVs to generate the same removal map will also 
result in the grinding of the workpiece to geometrical 
conformance. 
The novelty of this project is in showing that although the 
various manual operators may use very differing tool paths, 
velocities and forces to tackle the same grinding task, the 
skill of manual surface finishing can be encapsulated in the 
form of a material removal map. This can be proved in the 
future work, by carrying out KPV capture of various manual 
operators working on a certain finishing task. After capturing 
the KPVs of these manual operators, it will be fed into the 
analytical MRR model to calculate the material removal map. 
This material removal map would be similar to each other, 
even though the strategies of the manual operators may 
differ. This method of capturing and quantifying the surface 
finishing skill of a manual operator is novel and has not been 
previously carried out. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Dr Albert Causo for his help 
and advice in the research work. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Huang, Z. M. Gong, X. Q. Chen, and L. Zhou, "SMART robotic 
system for 3D profile turbine vane airfoil repair," International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 21, pp. 275-83, / 2003. 
[2] L. Zhang, H. Y. Tam, C. M. Yuan, Y. P. Chen, and Z. D. Zhou, "An 
investigation of material removal in polishing with fixed abrasives," 
Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of 
Engineering Manufacture, v216, n1, pp. 103-112, 2002. 
[3] H.-y. Tam and H. Cheng, "An investigation of the effects of the tool path 
on the removal of material in polishing," Journal of Materials Processing 
Technology, vol. 210, pp. 807-818, 3/19/ 2010. 
[4] L. Zhang, H. Y. Tam, C. M. Yuan, Y. P. Chen, Z. D. Zhou, and L. 
Zheng, "On the removal of material along a polishing path by fixed 
abrasives," Proceedings of the Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: 
Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 216, pp. 1217-1225, 2002. 
[5] X. Ren, M. Cabaravdic, X. Zhang, and B. Kuhlenkotter, "A local process 
model for simulation of robotic belt grinding," International Journal of 
Machine Tools & Manufacture, vol. 47, pp. 962-70, 05/ 2007. 
[6] R. Xiangyang and B. Kuhlenkotter, "Real-time simulation and 
visualization of robotic belt grinding processes," International Journal of 
Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 35, pp. 1090-9, 02/ 2008. 
[7] S. Wu, K. Kazerounian, Z. Gan, and Y. Sun, "A simulation platform for 
optimal selection of robotic belt grinding system parameters," International 
Journal of Advanced Manufacturing Technology, vol. 64, pp. 447-458, 
2013. 
[8] A. Irish, I. Mantegh, and F. Janabi-Sharifi, "A PbD approach for learning 
pseudo-periodic robot trajectories over curved surfaces," in Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), 2010 IEEE/ASME International 
Conference on, 2010, pp. 1425-1432. 
[9]H. Y. Tam, C. K. A. Mok, and K. L. Yiu, “Tool Dwell Time 
Computation in Computer-controlled Surfacing based on Constrained 
Optimization,” Machining Science and Technology, 13(3) pp. 356-371, 
2009 
Figure 9. Flow Chart Summary 
1379
