  
? 
Abstract—This paper proposes a pneumatic gripper that 
allows gripping of the human body aimed for the transfer 
support, whether the body is lying down or leaning against the 
back support on the chair. To grip the body safely and 
comfortably under any conditions, two functions are newly 
introduced. One of them is “shape adaptive joints” which 
enable every gripping force to be equally distributed at each 
contact point regardless of body shape. The other is “slip in tip” 
which helps to reduce both the risk of injury and the 
uncomfortable friction between the body and the gripper, 
realized by a new pneumatic actuator to draw out the inner 
chambers without rubbing against the contact surface. It allows 
to bend following to the body shape and can also retract the 
chamber to release the patient safely. The validity of  these 
functions are verified by a developed prototype called “Big-
hand”, and its effectiveness for the transfer support is 
experimentally confirmed by lifting a mannequin and a human 
being. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The number of people over the age of 60 is increasing all 
around the world. This phenomenon is even dire when it 
comes to Japan. The increasing number of old people leads 
to increase in demand of caregiver. Among the entire task 
carried out by caregiver, human body lifting task is the most 
physically challenged. This task can be transferring a person 
from a place to the next one which can take place either in 
bed room, living room, bathroom or toilet. Due to the 
physical requirement of the task itself, caregivers are prone 
to inflict injury onto themselves as human being tends to 
exert more force when they are dealing with delicate objects. 
Therefore, a human body lifting system is needed in this 
situation to reduce the burden of caregiver. Current research 
on human body lifting system can be separated into two 
major groups which are power suit and stand-alone human 
transfer unit device. The power suit type normally could be 
used by caregiver or the old people and their purpose is to 
boost the user strength. One of good examples for this kind 
of system is HAL which was developed by Tsukuba 
University[1]. The problem with this kind of system is the 
need for wearing and taking off takes time  and the system 
might obstruct some of the daily activity movement while it 
is being worn.  For better freedom in doing daily simple task, 
the later system is much preferred choice as the system will 
not get in the way of users.  
 
ChiunTai Loh, Hideyuki Tsukagoshi is with Department of Mechanical 
and Control Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1-I1-23 O-
okayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo 152-8552 Japan (Phone: +813-5734-3085; 
Fax: +813-5734-3085; email: lohchiuntai@cm.ctrl.titech.ac.jp)   
 
Figure 1.  Big-hand concept application 
There are several different types of standalone human 
transfer system devices being developed up to now. RIBA is 
one of the human lifting robots that has been developed to 
help caregiver transferring patient [2,3,4]. The problem with 
this robot is that it needs to be operated by a third person and 
the old people hardly can operate the robot themselves. 
Besides, this robot system can only carry a human being in a 
certain posture where the both legs of the human are lifted 
off ground. This would be bad for old people as it eliminate 
the chance for them to exercise and strengthen their muscle. 
Toyota has also come up with a patient transferring system 
called Toyota Care Assist Robot[5]. This robot is a wheel 
chair type and it can lift a patient from bed directly and being 
push to the desired destination. The problem with this device 
is that the patient must be pushed by caregiver and it could 
not lift the patient when it is lying against something on their 
back. There are also some other human lifting apparatus 
where some are operated fully mechanical and some with 
simple electrical motor control[6~9]. These apparatus are 
designed specifically for big facilities like hospital. As this 
apparatus may help in reducing the required number of 
people when a patient is being transfer, the time taken to 
prepare a patient for transferring is longer than manual 
transfer due to the need of a special strap and jacket to be 
worn on the patient first. Some nurses or caregiver would opt 
not to use this device and prefer to transfer patient manually 
due to the time consuming procedure. Among all the 
apparatus and devices, the main issue is still the connection 
between the human being and the apparatus. A quick 
connection system would be highly desirable and it would 
promote the use of supporting device in caregiver industry. 
In this paper, a human body gripper that allows quick 
connection between the apparatus and human body is being 
proposed.  
The gripper for this quick connection between the human 
body and transferring device is called Big-hand. This Big-
hand gripper has two main components. First component is 
Pneumatic Big-hand Gripper with Slip-in Tip Aimed for the 
Transfer Support of the Human Body 
ChiunTai Loh, Hideyuki Tsukagoshi 
Big-hand 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 475
  
the shape adaptive joint which it allows the gripper to 
conform to the shape of the human body when gripping 
occurs. To allow gripping under any condition, the second 
slip-in tip comes into play as it enables the gripper to slip its 
tip in between the human body and the surface the body is 
lying against. The detail of this gripper design will be 
discussed in this paper. This proposed gripper will be used in 
a human body supporting system where it has three different 
operating modes. The system can be operated by a care giver 
onsite or the old person can operate the system on their own 
as shown in Figure 1. The system can be made into remote 
control where the caregiver controls the supporting system 
through telecommunication networking.  
The contents that will be discussed in this paper are 
separated into four major sections. First of all, the concept of 
Big-hand will be discussed. Then it will follow by the Big-
hand shape adaptive joint. Slip-in tip operating principle will 
be discussed in the following section and finally the 
fabrication and experiment of the Big-hand will be discussed 
in the final section.  
II. BIG-HAND GRIPPER 
Big-hand gripper is designed to grip onto human body 
allowing transfer apparatus or supporting system to 
manipulate the human body. There are a few number of 
gripper out there but most of the grippers are gripping object 
having all the force concentrated on two points. Soft robot 
gripper developed by Harvard University[10] is able to 
handle delicate objects without deforming it but the gripper 
is not able to grip and lift up an actual human. Besides, the 
gripper is lifting its object using mainly frictional force 
between the gripper and the object it is manipulating. In 
terms of even force distribution, the gripper developed by 
Hirose Laboratory from Tokyo Institute of Technology is 
able to do so[11]. The gripper is form from multiple linkages 
and gripping action is done with curling action. If the human 
is leaning towards something at their back, the gripper could 
not grip the object in that situation. Besides, the relative 
torque between the joints in the gripper is fixed and could 
not be change as all of the joints are connected with the same 
wire.  The proposed Big-hand gripper is able to grip a human 
body under any situation regardless of the spacing behind the 
back of the body.  
The design for Big-hand is shown in Figure 2. In this 
Big-hand design, all actuator are powered using pneumatic 
pressure with aluminum frame for structural support. The 
whole gripper has 4 different groups of  and they are 
gripping joint chamber, release chamber, slip-in tip and tip 
retraction chamber embedded within the slip-in tip. First of 
all, the aluminum frame and hinges provide structural 
support to the whole system. Each and every four chamber in 
Big-hand drives different action. Gripping joint chamber 
provides gripping force action. Using pneumatic as a power 
source, it allows a switching of torque control to allow 
grasping feature switch from shape adaptive gripping and 
slip in push. The slip-in chamber drives the slip-in motion of 
the tip and the retraction chamber drives the retraction action 
of the tip. Lastly, the release chamber will force the gripper 
to open when the chamber is being pressurized.  
For the grasping sequence, initially the slip-in tip is 
hidden within the in Figure 3(i). While the tip stays within 
the gripper, the gripper enters a body trailing mode where 
the tip of the gripper trail against the body from the side to 
the back as shown in Figure 3(ii). Having the slip-in tip kept 
within the gripper, the gripper grips a human body without 
the tip extending out as shown in Figure 3(iii). This kind of 
gripping does not require slip in as it does not extend to the 
back of the human body. The  
 
Figure 2.  Big-hand gripper design 
 
(i) Gripping initial stage 
 
(ii) Body trailing 
 
(iii) Slip-in extension 
 
(iv) Full Grasp 
Figure 3.  Big-hand gripping sequence 
Big-hand Gripper 
476
  
 
Figure 4.  Vertical gripping support 
required torque to complete this gripping action is also low 
and can be done using very low pressure. The human body 
still could not be lifted at this point as there is no support at 
the back of the body. The gripper will then extend its tip to 
provide its support to the back of the human body as shown 
in Figure 3(iv). Once the gripper tip is fully extended, lifting 
of the human body can be done without causing much 
problem as the main upward force is transferred through the 
tip of the gripper.  
When grasping the patient while they are lying down, the 
lifting action is mainly comes from the tip of the gripper. As 
the patient body is oriented vertically, the main support does 
not come from the grasping force. Instead, main support 
comes from the aluminum structure of the gripper. The 
gripper is grasping the patient chest where there are organs 
under it and applying too much force would be not desirable. 
As shown in Figure 4, the aluminum structure of the gripper 
will support the patient armpit in the vertical orientation. 
Gripping force is used for ensuring the patient does not 
detach off the gripper where it will be very small.  
III. SHAPE ADAPTIVE JOINT 
Normal gripper will grip onto an object with all the force 
focusing on two points. If this were to happen onto human, 
the person being gripped by the gripper will experience a 
great deal of discomfort. Even force distribution must be 
achieved to provide higher level of comfort when gripping.  
From Figure 5(a), if a cantilever beam sustaining an 
evenly distributed force throughout the beam, the internal 
moment will follow a parabolic curve. This parabolic 
reduction is found from double integration of a constant 
force. Therefore, the torque generated in the gripper joint 
must follow the torque profile shown in Figure 5(b). To find 
the thickness for each of the joint in Big-hand, the equation 
for the thickness calculation starts from equation (1) below.  
 
) (
) (
2
2
x F
dx
x d
?
?
 (1) 
With the condition of differentiation of torque and torque 
at the tip of the gripper equals to zero, the derived equation 
for torque is shown in equation (2). As the gripping force is 
the same, F(x) for every location within x is equals to f and L 
is the  
   
 
      (a) Cantilever even force model    (b) Required torque profile  
Figure 5.  Even force distribution torque requirement 
 
Figure 6.  Joint torque model 
total length of the gripper measuring from the base which is 
defined by the designer.  
 
2
2
1
2
) ( ?
?
?
?
?
?
? ?
L
x fL
x ?
 (2) 
Equation (2) only allows the calculation of the torque at 
each joint provided the desired output force, f, and also the 
length of the gripper, L, is known in first place. Joint torque 
for Big-hand is generated using air-bladder fixed in onto the 
joint as shown in Figure 6. When the bladder is being 
pressurized, expansion of the air bladder will create a 
pushing force towards the plate on the adjacent linkages 
which will then turn into torque. As shown in equation (3), 
the output force from the air bladder normal to the linkage 
plate is equals to pressure times the area.  
 pA F? (3) 
Assuming that the force output on the plate is uniform, 
the total output force can be replaced with a single point 
force situated at the middle of the plate. Using this point 
force, the output torque equation for this joint is shown in 
equation (4).  
 
? ? ?
?
?
?
?
?
? ? ?
h c
T T
x t
w x t p
2
) (
) ( ?
 (4) 
The T
c
 in equation (4) is the clearance thickness for the 
slip-in tip chamber and the T
h
 is the distance between the 
hinge rotation axis and the linkage base. Both of this 
parameter is fixed by the designer. The w in equation (4) is 
the width of the gripper. Combining equation (2) and 
equation (4) the relationship between the required torque and 
the joint thickness and be formed. Supplied pressure, p, force 
output from gripper, f, and the width of the gripper, w, is 
eliminated and the equation to calculate the joint thickness is 
shown in equation (5). From the equation, the designer need 
?
Vertical 
support area 
Big-hand 
Gripper 
F
X
X
t
x
t
x
h
T
c
T
x
t
?
F
F
X
?
p
Y
477
  
to decide on the length of the gripper and also the first joint 
thickness, t
0
, in the first place. The rest of the joint thickness 
can be found using equation (5) using numerical calculation.  
 
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
? ? ?
?
?
?
?
?
? ? ? ?
?
?
?
?
?
? ?
2 2 2
2
2
) (
) (
2 2
0
2
0
L
Lx
x
T T
t
L
t
T T
x t
x t
h c h c
 (5) 
IV. SLIP-IN TIP 
Having a gripper tip to slip under a person body is very 
crucial to provide a full enclosure gripping. Without the tip 
of the gripper slipped under the body, the gripper can only 
lift a person only relying of the gripping friction when that 
person is lying horizontally. If the tip of the gripper is being 
forced under the patient, the force that is required is very 
large as it needs to overcome the friction between the gripper 
tip with the bed, F
n
µ
n
, and patient body, F
b
sin?+ F
b
cos?µ
b
. 
Figure 7 shows the model of the tip slipping under a human 
body. 
 
Ma F F F F
n n b b b h
? ? ? ? ? ?? ? cos sin
 (6) 
Deriving from Figure 7 model, the horizontal force 
required to push in the gripper tip can be shown in equation 
(6) with Ma as the final gripper tip movement. The force 
from the body and also the bed is increasing as the gripper is 
being pushed in due to the displacement caused by the 
gripper tip thickness.  
To reduce this slip in resistance, a roll in method is 
preferred. The main characteristic of roll in method is that 
the contact surface of the gripper tip is always in static 
condition with relative to the surface of the human body and 
bed. When the point position on the tip surface is not moving 
with relative to the contact surface, the friction force is at 
minimal. C-Pam bed to bed transfer system[12] and 
Panasonic Power Motion Assist[13] is using this concept to 
reduce the slip in friction. These two design are using 
electrical motor to power the motor that drives the belt when 
slip in is being done. If this method is being used at the tip of 
the gripper slip-in motion, the size of the tip will become 
very large due to the need to accommodate gears and motor 
and also weight is also an issue. Moreover, the system 
require precise rolling rate so that it does not create any 
unnecessary friction onto the person body.  
 
Figure 7.  Direct slip-in model 
   
(a) Initial state              (b) Slip-in in process                (c) Final state 
Figure 8.  Air bag slip-in process 
A. Inverse pneumatic air bag slip-in tip 
Roll in method using electrical motor is impossible 
without sacrificing the design size and weight. Using 
pneumatic method, the weight and size problem can be 
solved easily. As shown in Figure 8(a), having a sealed bag 
with one side of it being inversely inserted back into the bag, 
the initial size of the bag will be half of its original length. 
When air pressure being supplied into the air bag, the air 
inside the air-bag will try to create as much space as possible 
thus forcing the inversely inserted side of the bag to expand 
out. In Figure 8, as the inversed side is slipped under the 
human body, the only place it could expand is under the 
human body. Once all the empty space is being occupied by 
the bag, the pressure in the bag will slowly increases and will 
then push the human body upward which then create more 
space for the bag to expand in front. Figure 8(b) illustrate on 
the direction of expansion and also the pushing force of the 
air bag. This sequence will keep on repeat itself until all the 
inverse portion is fully drawn out which is shown in Figure 
8(c) below.  
This airbag slip in principle is proposed to be used on the 
tip of Big-hand gripper. The arrangement of the bag is shown 
in Figure 9. Before gripping is carried out, gripper tip air bag 
is slip into the gripper. When pressure supplied to the slip-in 
tip chamber, the tip will extend itself out under the human 
body. The work done by this slip-in tip can be calculated 
using equation (7). Work of a pneumatic air-bag can be 
represented by pressure, p, times the change of volume, V ? . 
There is a string connecting to the tip of the gripper used for 
retraction purpose and it will cause some frictional force 
when slip in occurs. This frictional force is represented with 
t r
d T?
 
in the equation. Lastly, the work for lifting the human 
body is represented with b b
d F?
. 
 
b b t r
d F d T V p ? ? ? ? ?
 (7) 
 
Figure 9.  Slip-in tip model 
 
Bed 
h
F
b
F
Body 
n
F
Slip-in direction 
p
Upward push 
p
r
T
b
F
b
A
t
d ? V ?
b
d ?
Slip-in tip 
Retraction 
String 
Chamber 3 
Chamber 4 
Retraction String 
Retraction movement 
Chamber 1 
Chamber 2 
Chamber 1: Gripping 
Chamber 2: Releasing 
Chamber 3: Slip-in Extension 
Chamber 4: Tip Retraction 
478
  
Figure 10.  Tip retracting mechanism 
The output force of that lift up the patient body, F
b
, 
shown in equation (8) is related to the area of the gripper tip, 
A
b
, shown in Figure 9. This area is increasing as the gripper 
tip expands. Therefore as the gripper tip expands, the lifting 
force is increasing as well if the supplied pressure remains 
constant.  
 
b b
pA F ?
 (8) 
B. Tip retracting mechanism 
Expanding the gripper tip under a human body is an easy 
job by just pressurizing the air gripper tip air bag. Without a 
retracting mechanism, the gripper could not retract its tip. 
Retracting mechanism allows the gripper tip to be extracted 
out from the gap under the patient body smoothly and 
allowing the gripper to release the patient.  
To make this retracting mechanism, a string is attached to 
the tip within the airbag and the string is being pulled up to 
the base of Big-hand. At the base, another air-bag within this 
extending tip air bag is being attached as shown in Figure 10. 
By expanding this retraction air-bag, it will create pulling 
force along the string which will then pull back the tip of the 
gripper.  
The required retraction length for the tip is double the 
length of the gripper base. Due to this problem the retraction 
string is loop around the retracretractionon air bag which 
produces twice the pulling length with the same expansion 
distance.  
V. FABRICATION AND TEST 
A. High pressure duty air bag  
All the actuators in Big-hand are pneumatic actuated and 
the components used are not conventional cylinder or 
pneumatic actuators. The actuators used in Big-hand require 
specific shape which allows it to behave accordingly. For 
custom shapes, a custom made bag is required. Polyurethane 
can be made into desired shape easily using heat. The 
strength of polyurethane material by itself is not strong 
enough to withstand high pressure. An air bag made from 
0.5mm thick polyurethane is only able to withstand 0.1MPa 
pressure. The failure of the bag starts from plastic elongation 
and will lead to rupture in the end. To strengthen the air bag, 
polyurethane is reinforced with nylon fiber as nylon fiber has 
high tensile strength.  
Nylon fabric can merge with polyurethane sheet under 
high pressure and heat. Pressing polyurethane sheet against 
nylon fabric at 200°C for 4 minutes to 5 minutes will have 
the sheet melted and sip into nylon fabric cavity. 
Polyurethane coated nylon fabric is then cut and merged into 
the desired shape. Merging of the edge of the shape is also 
done at 200°C for 4 minutes to 5 minutes at high pressure. 
The result from this fabrication method is a high pressure 
duty air bag. Test has been done on the fabricated bag and it 
shows that it could sustain up to 0.55MPa without showing 
any sign of failure. As the application for this design does 
not require pressure higher than 0.2MPa, the limit of the air 
bag is not tested.  
 
Figure 11.  Air bag joint 
 
Figure 12.  Air bag joint torque output 
B. Air bag joint  
Air bag for the joint is fabricated using nylon reinforced 
polyurethane method. For this fabrication, the shape of the 
air bag must be done at a bending angle larger than the 
desired bending angle. This is to ensure that the bending 
torque does not suffer from sudden drop. The fabricated joint 
is shown in Figure 11. For torque test, the fabricated joint 
has a plate area of 2250mm
2
 and a gap of 25mm from the 
hinge joint.  
Torque of the air bag joint is measured using 0.05MPa 
pressure and the result is shown in Figure 12. From the 
graph, it shows that the joint torque drops a little as the 
bending angle increases. The generated torque is very 
satisfying and is enough to be implemented in this Big-hand 
design. But still a constant torque output is still desirable for 
simple control.  
C. Big-hand gripper  
A human size Big-hand prototype gripper is being built. 
The gripper linkage length ratio is following the actual size. 
A test has been done using the gripper to grip a human body. 
The test result shows that the gripper can grip the human 
body following its shape. The result shows that the gripper is 
able to grip following the shape of the human body which 
can be seen in Figure 13.  
D. Slip-in tip  
A slip in tip has been fabricated using the same nylon 
reinforced polyurethane method. The fabricated slip-in tip is 
shown in Figure 14. The tip of the bag is slowly reducing in 
?
?
Desired Torque 
479
  
width until it is 5cm at the tip. This is to allow overlapping 
of both sides gripper at the back of the human body. The slip 
in tip has two metal plate slip where one is placed on top and 
another one is at the bottom of the bag. These plates are to 
ensure that the tip is easily slipped under a human body at 
initial condition so that body lifting can be carried out to 
create space for the tip extension.  
Using the fabricated tip, test is being done by having this 
slip-in tip slip under a heavy object weighing 10kg. Pressure 
less than 0.05MPa is being used in this experiment. The 
entire slip in process is being captured and shown in Figure 
15. From the process it is seen that the tip is able to expand 
smoothly under the heavy object.  
Using the same slip-in gripper tip, test has been done on 
actual human with various weights from 65kg to 85kg. The 
test is done with the subject lying against soft bed and hard 
 
Figure 13.  Big-hand gripper 
 
Figure 14.  Slip-in gripper tip 
 
   
  
Figure 15.  Slip-in sequence 
 
Figure 16.  Actual human test 
flooring as shown in Figure 16. Various slip-in angles of the 
gripper tip are also tested. It is found out that regardless of 
the flooring, slip-in angle and also the weight of the subject, 
the slip-in action can be carried out with 0.1MPa pressure. A 
horizontal supporting force is required to prevent the gripper 
tip from rebound back out and the required force does not 
exceed 40N at any time of the slip in action. When the 
gripper tip is fully inflated at 0.1MPa, the stiffness is very 
high is hardly deformed when external force is being applied 
to it.  
The retracting mechanism air bag within the slip-in 
gripper tip is being build and is shown in Figure 17. The 
mechanism consists of an air bag mounted on a rail to ensure 
expansion is running along a specific direction. String 
attached to the tip of the gripper is passed through the air 
bag. This railed air bag is then attached within the gripper tip 
air bag as shown in Figure 18(a). Pressure supply of the 
retracting air bag is being done by connecting the tube 
through tightly sealed tube connector to the outside of the 
bag as shown in Figure 18(b). The bag is then sealed up to 
form the gripper tip air bag.  
The fabricated slip-in tip with embedded retracting 
mechanism is being tested and test result is being shown in 
Figure 19. The figure shows that retracting mechanism is 
able to pull back the gripper tip without the need of any 
external force.  
D. Gripper Combination with Carrier  
A prototype of carrier using the Big-hand is being built. 
In this carrier, it is able to provide upward push support for  
  
Figure 17.  Retracting air bag 
  
(a) Retracting air bag mounting               (b) tube connection  
Metal Plate 
1 
2 
3 4 
Slip-in gripper tip 
Heavy object 
Rail 
Air bag 
Retracting air bag 
Tube 
connection 
Connecting 
tube 
480
  
Figure 18.  Retracting air bag mounting and tubing 
 
Figure 19.  Gripper tip retraction test 
   
(a) Mannequin test 
 
(b) Human test 
Figure 20.  Big-hand with carrier test 
standup motion. At the same time, the carrier is able to 
provide some body posture adjustment. Test has been done 
on a mannequin showing in Figure 20(a) and actual human 
test is shown in Figure 20(b).  
VI. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
An actual human size gripper without slip-in tip has been 
fabricated and tested on a mannequin and human being. The 
test shows that it can grab onto the mannequin perfectly. The 
proposed slip-in tip in this paper shows that roll in action can 
be done with a lighter and smaller design using pneumatic 
power. The concept of the slip in gripper tip with retracting 
mechanism in it has been tested and it shows that the tip can 
be carried out perfectly without the need of precise control. 
This slip in concept can be alter and implemented as a 
stretcher for slip in sheet under patient or casualties. This 
stretcher can also be used to extract casualty in rubble under 
a small gap during search and rescue operation. In the future, 
an actual adult size Big-hand gripper with the slip-in tip will 
be fabricated and the torque control system will be focused 
as well. Balancing of the lifting up motion will be looked 
into as well in the future.  
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Satoh, T. Kawabata, Y. Sankai, “Bathing Care Assistance with 
Robot Suit HAL” Proc. 2009 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Biomimetics, Guilin, China, pp. 498-503, 2009 
[2] T. Mukai, S. Hirano, H. Nakashima, Y. Sakaida, “Realization of 
Patient-Transfer Tasks Using Nursing-Care Assistant Robot RIBA 
and Its Safety Measures” Proc. 2010 JSME Conference on Robotics 
and Mechatronics, Asahikawa, Japan, 2010. 
[3] T. Mukai, S. Hirano, H. Nakashima, Y. Kato, Y. Sakaida, S. Guo, S. 
Hosoe, “Development of a Nursing-care Assistant Robot RIBA That 
Can Lift a Human in Its Arm” International Conference on 
Intelligent Robot and Systems, Taipei, pp. 5996-6001, 2010  
[4] T. Mukai, S. Hirano, M. Yoshida, H. Nakashima, S. Guo, Y. 
Hayakawa, “Tactile-Based Motion Adjustment for the Nursing-Care 
Assistant Robot RIBA” IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Automation, Shanghai, pp. 5435-5441, 2011  
[5] Toyota Care Assist Robot, http://www.toyota-
global.com/innovation/partner_robot/family_2.html, June 2012 
[6] C.L. Wilson “Lifting and Walking Jacket” U.S. Patent 3252704, May 
24, 1966. 
[7] J.P. Bakker “Patient Lifting Apparatus” U.S. Patent 3694829, Oct 3, 
1972. 
[8] J.B. Murray “Patient Lifting Device” U.S. Patent 4202063, May 13, 
1980 
[9] T.J. Lucas “Patient Lifting Apparatus” International Patent WO 
2011/151639, Dec 8, 2011. 
[10] F. Ilievski, A.D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen, G.M. Whitesides, 
“Soft Robotics for Chemists” Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Vol. 50, pp. 
1890-1895, 2011.  
[11] S. Hirose, Y. Umetani, “The Development of Soft Gripper for the 
Versatile Robot Hand” Mechanism and Machine Theory Journal, Vol 
13, pp. 351-359, 1978  
[12] H. Wang, F. Kasagami, “A Patient Transfer Apparatus between Bed 
and Stretcher” IEEE Trans. Systems, Man, and Cybernetic-Part B: 
Cybernetics, Vol. 38, pp.60-67, February 2008. 
 
1 2 3 
1 2 3 
1 2 3 
481
