 
 
CPG-Based Control Design for Bipedal Walking on  
Unknown Slope Surfaces  
 
Kai-Tai Song, Member, IEEE, and Chang-Hung Hsieh 
  
 
Abstract—The paper presents a walking pattern generator and 
a balance control system for a bipedal robot to handle an 
unknown slope. The robot uses onboard gyro and 
accelerometer sensors to detect the pose information of the 
upper-body. A controller is proposed for the robot to walk on 
an unknown slope by adjusting the tilt angle of the upper-body. 
The theory of central pattern generator (CPG) is applied to 
generate the walking trajectory. By using the pose information 
of the upper-body, we developed a method to determine the 
relationship between the slope surface and the upper-body 
pose and generate the compensation motion to adjust the tilt 
angle of the upper-body. The compensation control consists of 
predictive compensation and immediate compensation. The 
predictive compensation responds to adjust the upper-body 
pose before beginning of the next step. The immediate 
compensation is applied to adjust the upper-body pose during 
the single support phase. The integrated controller adapts to 
the unknown slope in real time while robot walking. Using the 
bipedal robot NAO, the experimental results show that the 
biped robot can walk successfully on unknown slopes. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Humanoid robotics has made remarkable progress in 
recent years. Various biped robots have been developed for 
contests, entertainment, and research purposes because of 
their friendly appearance and capacity of mobility. However, 
for robots to step down from the performing stage and start 
to walk in daily-life human environments, balance control 
will pose a challenging problem. Many useful tools have 
been developed to allow biped robots to walk stably on a flat 
surface. They are basically offline walking gait generating 
schemes and pre-designed ideal walking trajectory using a 
stable criterion. Bipedal walking on unknown terrains is 
much more complicated and one of the most important 
research topics in bipedal robotics. There are increasing 
interests that attempts to design compensation control 
schemes to online adjust the walking trajectory in order to 
satisfy the stable strategy by sensory information to achieve 
balance walking on unknown surfaces [1][2]. 
The study of biological walking based on neural periodic 
control of locomotion has drawn increasing attention in 
recent years [3][4]. Central Pattern Generators (CPGs) are 
networks of nonlinear oscillation neurons found in both 
invertebrate and vertebrate animals that can produce 
rhythmic patterns of neural activity without receiving 
rhythmic inputs from higher control centers. Many a ttempts 
have shown that CPG can be used as the main controller for 
balance walking of biped and multi-legged robots on 
irregular terrain s [5-11]. The study of CPG -based bipedal 
walking has focused on develop ing different walking pattern 
to achieve balance walking on flat surfaces [12-15]. 
Accordingly, we consider that to employ CPG method as the 
main controller for bipedal balance walking on irregular 
terrain is more difficult . It is also understood that adjusting 
the CPG parameters to achieve balance walki ng is quite 
complex. In order to increase the degrees of terrain 
irregularity which bipedal can cope with, we suggest to 
employ additional methods of reflex and adjustment to 
cover the limit s posed by CPG method. Hence, we will 
suggest to use multiple CPGs to reduce the complexity of 
tuning CPG parameters, and to add external control units 
with the main controller of CPG to achieve balance walking 
on irregular terrain in the real world . 
In this paper, we adopt biological concept of self-
produced periodic cycles to design the biped walking pattern. 
A novel design for pose control of upper-body, based-on two 
compensation controllers to adjust the pose of upper-body at 
different phases of walking period. Based on the pose control 
of upper-body, a bipedal robot can adjust the pose of upper-
body to adapt to unknown slope surfaces in real time.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, CPG-based walking pattern generating is discussed. A 
design for the compensation controller is described in 
Section III. The experimental results are shown in Section IV. 
In Section V, we will conclude the contribution of this paper. 
II. CPG-BASED WALKING PATTERN GENEROTION 
A walking pattern generator for a biped robot (NAO, in 
this work) has been designed based on an arrangement of 
multiple CPGs. We also added an external compensation 
controller in order to achieve balanced static walking. 
A. Neural Oscillator Model  
The neural oscillator model proposed by Matsuoka [16-
17] was adopted in this work. The Matsuoka oscillator model 
consists of two neurons arranged in mutual inhibition. The 
mathematical model among two neurons with adaptation is 
expressed in continuous-variable form by following 
equations[16-17]: 
Kai-Tai Song and Chang-Hung Hsieh are with the Institute of Electrical 
Control Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 
(phone: +886-3-5731865; fax: +886-3-5715998; e-mail: ktsong@ 
mail.nctu.edu.tw;  poloqe8484.ece99g@nctu.edu.tw). This work was 
supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan, under grant NSC-99-
2221-E-009-135-MY2.  
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5109
 
 
 ? 
    
 
   
 
  [ 
 
]
 
 ∑ 
 
[ 
 
]
 
 ,        (1) 
 
 
 ? 
 [ 
 
]
 
  
 
  ,                              (2) 
 
 
 ? 
    
 
   
 
  [ 
 
]
 
 ∑ 
 
[ 
 
]
 
   ,         (3) 
 
 
 ? 
 [ 
 
]
 
  
 
    ,                               (4) 
  [ 
 
]
 
 [ 
 
]
 
 ,                                  (5) 
[ ]
 
     (   )        [ ]
 
      (   )  ,              (6) 
where  
 
,  
 
,  
 
 and  
 
 are internal states,   and   are 
constants,  
 
 is an input,  
 
 is scaled gain, and    is an output 
of the oscillator. Time constants  
 
 and  
 
 characterize the 
output wave shape and its frequency and a tonic excitation   
modulates the output amplitude. 
B. Single Support Phase(SSP) 
The motion of striding is a symmetric cycle of periodicity 
between left and right foot in SSP, so we arrange CPGs to 
achieve swing foot forward moving and upper-body swing. 
In the literatures, an oscillator is allocated at each joint or 
motor for applying CPGs to locomotion of biped robot[12-
13]. Self-coordination is designed between multiple 
oscillators to obtain the ideal walking gait, but adjusting 
these parameters is complicated. The computation time 
would be an issue for practical implementation, considering 
the feedback control and adjusting the balance of robot using 
real-time sensory information.  Therefore, we want to use 
fewer oscillators to build the walking pattern, and the 
parameters of CPGs are adjusted in a simpler way to obtain 
the output curve of CPGs.  
We must let each CPG have different functionality and 
through the CPG arrangement to produce an integral walking 
stride. Endo et al. proposed some configurations about the 
arrangement of CPGs [14-15]. With the idea, we allocated 
four neural oscillators to control the motion of robot in SSP, 
as shown in Fig. 1. We designed two oscillators which are 
used to obtain the Cartesian coordinate positions of two feet 
and waist to produce overall stride curve. The first oscillator 
 
Figure 1. Arrangement of four CPGs for bipedal walking 
is allocated to control the position of both legs  
  
,  
  
 along 
the Z (vertical) direction in a symmetrical manner: 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
     ,                     (7) 
 
  
      
 
     
 
 
 
    ,                       (8) 
where  
  
 is the Z-direction length from left foot to shoulder, 
 
  
 is the Z-direction length from right foot to shoulder,  
 
 is 
the output of the oscillator for Z-direction,   
 
 is the scaled 
factor of the amplitude of  
 
 and  
 
 is the initial length of Z-
direction.  
The second oscillator is allocated to control the position 
of both leg  
  
,  
  
 along the X (forward) direction: 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
      ,                     (9) 
 
  
      
 
     
 
 
 
     ,                     (10) 
where   
 
 is the offset of X-direction between two foot sole 
in the DSP,  
  
 is the difference value between   
 
 and the 
left toot position,  
  
 is the difference value between   
 
 and 
the right foot position,  
 
 is output of oscillator for X-
direction and   
 
 is scaled factor. 
Based on the walking strategy for a bipedal with a torso 
of large mass [18], we consider the center or gravity(CoG) of 
the robot would change when the swing foot is lifting from 
the floor. Hence, we need to add the upper-body swing to let 
the CoG of the robot maintain on a stable region. The upper-
body is upright in double support phase(DSP). During the 
SSP, the upper-body is inclined to the direction of the 
support foot with the lifting of the swing foot, and then the 
upper-body is recovered to upright with the landing of the 
swing foot, as shown in Fig. 2(a). During the SSP, the upper-
body is inclined forward with lifting of the swing foot, and 
then the upper-body is inclined backward with landing of the 
swing foot, as shown in Fig. 2(b). According to the above 
strategy, the remaining two oscillators are used to make 
upper-body of the robot to left-right and forward-backward 
sway with the stride behavior that produce center of gravity 
moving to control the robot can maintain balance. Therefore, 
the third oscillator is allocated to control the pitch joint angle 
of hip: 
 
              
  
         
  
         
   ,           (11) 
where  
              
 controls upper-body to swing forward-
backward,  
         
 is oscillator output for pitch plane and 
 
         
 is scaled factor of  
         
. The fourth oscillator 
is allocated to control the roll joint angle of hip: 
 
             
  
        
  
        
  ,              (12) 
 
 
              (a) Frontal Plane                            (b) Lateral Plane 
Figure 2. The schematics of the upper-body swing 
5110
where  
             
 controls upper-body to swing left and 
right,  
        
 is the oscillator output for roll plane and 
 
        
 is the scaled factor of  
        
. 
For bipedal walking, it is necessary to maintain stable 
stride by using four oscillators in SSP. The frequency of 
controlling hip-pitch of CPG is double of the frequency of 
other CPGs, so that the upper-body can finish swing of an 
entire period in lateral plane when walking one step(half 
period of other CPGs). 
C. Double Support Phase(DSP) 
In the current design, the bipedal walking is static 
walking and the CoG of upper-body cannot be shifted to a 
stable position from hind to forefoot by the inertia force in 
the instantaneous conversion between two SSPs. Therefore, 
we designed a simple trajectory to control the CoG of upper-
body motion in DSP. The upper-body moves from hind to 
forefoot in Y-direction such that: 
 
  
  ( 
  
  
  
) 
 
   
  
,    
 
  
           
 , (13) 
where  
  
 is the coordinate of shoulder center in Y-direction, 
 
  
 is the coordinate of forefoot,  
  
 is coordinate position 
of hind foot,  
           
 is total time of DSP and  
 
 is 
current time in DSP. The purpose is to let the upper body 
move smoothly from hind to forefoot.  The upper-body 
moves from hind to forefoot in X-direction such that: 
 
  
  
  
(     
 
 
 
 
 
),    
 
  
           
 ,   (14)  
where  
  
 is the coordinate of shoulder center in X-
direction,  
  
 is scaled gain of shoulder center moving in X-
direction,  
 
 adjusts the curve of shoulder center moving in 
X-direction. The purpose of the formula is to allow the 
upper body to move slowly in the X-direction after the 
center of gravity switching from hind to forefoot, so that the 
sensing information obtained by the sensors can be more 
accurate. 
III. THE COMPENSATION DESIGN OF BALANCED WALKING  
As far as walking on slope surfaces is concerned, human 
can achieve balanced walking through adjusting the pose of 
upper-body. Moreover, when human walk on unknown slope 
surface with closed-eye, he/she is able to preliminary adjust 
the pose of upper-body by sensing of the underneath surface 
which located on the forefoot in the latter half of DSP. 
Further, if we feel unbalanced in SSP, we will immediate 
adjust the pose of upper-body to recovery balance. From the 
concept of human walking, we suggest to build the overall 
system of bipedal walking, as shown in Fig. 3. 
Walking Pattern 
Generator
SSP DSP
Predictive Compensation Controller
Predictive 
Compensation 
Controller
Predictive 
Compensation 
Value
Immediate 
Compensation 
Controller
Inverse 
kinematics
Robot
Robot-environment 
interaction
Timing of work is SSP
 
 
 
 Angle of 
All Joints
Sensor
Data
Predictive 
Compensation 
Immediate 
Compensation 
Timing 
selection
 
Figure 3. Overall system architecture of bipedal balance control 
Because the walking pattern only allows the biped robot 
to walk on flat surfaces, we must use the sensory data from 
onboard the robot to control the pose of upper body to 
achieve balanced walking on unknown slopes. As shown in 
Fig. 3, the strategy of controlling the pose of upper body is 
divided into two parts to achieve balance control, namely, 
the predictive and immediate compensation controllers. They 
are suggested to satisfy the balance walking strategy. 
A. Design of Predictive Compensation Controller 
Before the start of SSP of the next step, we hope the 
robot can accomplish the predictive compensation control so 
that the robot can successful adapt to the varying slope to 
prevent fall in the next walking step. Hence, the predictive 
compensation value must be calculated in the timing of latter 
half of DSP. The timing of latter half of DSP represents the 
meaning of completing to move the CoG from hind foot to 
forefoot.  The predictive compensation controller is designed 
to calculate the predictive compensation value in DSP, but 
the value is applied to the next step including the DSP. The 
trajectory of CoG is obtained through the inverse kinematics 
of the robot to convert to the ideal angle of each joint, and 
the ideal angle of each freedom make the bipedal walking. 
At the same time, the trajectory of CoG provides the timing 
selection to control the predictive compensation controller to 
update the predictive compensation value for the variation of 
the slope surface. First, the sensing information AngY is 
exploited to estimate the upper-body pose. The angular value 
and the angular velocity of pitching angle of upper-body are 
calculated at k instant: 
    
   
[ ] (    [   ]     [ ])     ,      (15) 
      
   
[ ] 
    [ ]     [   ]
( [ ]  [   ])
   ,                 (16) 
where [ ] and [   ] denote sample instants k and k-1, and 
these are the instants when the joint angles are output to 
control robot in DSP,      is sensor data of pitching angle 
of upper-body,   is timer,     
   
[ ] is angular value of 
pitching angle of upper-body at k instant and 
      
   
[ ]is angular velocity value of pitching angle of 
upper-body at k instant.  
We want to obtain more accurate angular value of pitch 
angle of upper-body in DSP, and the following formula is 
used to calculate it:  
    
     
  
 
     
   
  
 
       
   
  
 
  , (17) 
where     
     
 is the angular value of pitch angle of upper 
body in DSP,  
 
 and  
 
 are scaled factors and  
 
 is the 
average execution time. The predictive compensation value 
is exploited to adjust the angle of the Hip-Pitch joint and 
alter the input of Hip-Pitch CPG to tune the Hip-Pitch CPG 
curve: 
 
            
(   )      
     
  
              
 
   
            
( )  ,                  (18) 
 
 
  
  
  
            
   ,                     (19) 
where ( ) is step,   
            
 is predictive compensation 
value for pitch plane,     
     
 is angular value of pitching 
5111
angle of upper-body in DSP,  
 
 is the input of oscillator for 
pitch plane and  
  
 is a scaling factor. In DSP, the predictive 
compensation value will directly feedback to the Hip-Pitch 
joint so that the pose of upper-body can maintain upright to 
the flat ground. 
B. Design of Immediate Compensation Controller 
The predictive compensation controller is used to control 
the pose of upper-body to cope the variation of slope for the 
next step. However, during the SSP, the robot itself may 
encounter disturbance or the foot in contact with the ground 
may generate steering force/torque to make the robot lose 
balance.  Therefore, real-time pose sensing is used to 
immediately regulate the attitude angle of upper body, so 
that the robot can keep balance in SSP. In SSP, using the 
direct joint control and the walking trajectory can make the 
robot to achieve balanced striding on flat surface. In order to 
overcome the disturbance to maintain stable striding, we 
suggest a design of the immediate compensation controller, 
which includes immediate compensation on pitch plane and 
roll plane. The value of pitching angle of immediate 
compensation is calculated as shown in (20). The method 
adjusts the upper-body pose to maintain ideal pose. 
     
            
  
     
 (     
 ( 
              
  
            
)) ,   (20) 
where  
            
 is the immediate compensation value for 
pitch plane and  
     
 is scaling factor.  
The value of roll angle of immediate compensation is 
calculated in (21). The purpose is to make the upper body 
not to swing to the direction of support leg too much when 
the swing foot has been lifted. 
     
         
  
   
 (       
             
), 
  if | 
             
| |    | , (21) 
where  
         
 is the immediate compensation value for 
roll plane,  
   
 is scaling factor and      is the measured 
rolling angle. 
Finally, joint angle integration is designed to sum all 
control values of each joint. The control values include the 
swing value of the upper body and the compensation value. 
The totaled values are allocated to control the joint of Hip-
Pitch and the joint of Hip-Roll, as following equation 
(22)(23).  
         
            
  
              
 
  
            
  
            
    ,  (22) 
 
           
  
             
  
         
     ,       (23) 
where  
            
 is the sum of angular value of Hip-Pitch 
joint and  
           
 is the sum of anglular value of Hip-Roll 
joint. 
The two totaled values will be added to the desired 
angles of all joints which are calculated by the walking 
trajectory so that the robot can achieve balanced walking on 
unknown slope surfaces, even if the robot encounters 
disturbance situations. 
C. Phase Selection of  Compensatory Control 
 The working phase of two controllers is shown in Fig. 4. 
The predictive compensation controller predicts compensate 
value when the last two sensing data are sampled during the 
latter half of DSP. The predict compensation value will be 
applied in the next walking period. The predict compensation 
value is maintained in the walking period until the new 
predict compensation value is calculated. The immediate 
compensation controller works all the time during the SSP, 
and the compensate value will immediately update with 
received sensory information. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The proposed method has been implemented on the 
humanoid robot NAO in order to verify the effectiveness of 
the design. We let the robot walk on four different changing 
terrains: “Flat  4° Uphill Flat”, “Flat  4°Downhill Flat”, 
“Flat  7°Uphill” and “7°Downhill Flat”. 
For the experiment of robot walking on the terrain of 
“Flat  7°Uphill”, the recorded sensory data-AngY and 
AngX are shown in Fig. 5. In lateral plane, it occurred that 
the upper-body tilted backward in the beginning of the 7°
uphill, then through compensation control, it recovered with 
the upper-body pose as if the robot is walking on a flat 
surface, as shown in Fig. 5(a). In frontal plane, the swing of 
the upper-body was stable and symmetric, but when walked 
on the rear part of uphill, the robot walked toward right side 
with a curve-up of AngX, as shown in Fig. 5(b). 
The compensate data of predictive compensation 
controller is shown in Fig. 6. The predictive compensation 
values of tilt angle of upper-body approximately 
corresponding to the varying of sloped angles, but the 
convergence speed was slow when the robot walked from 
flat to uphill terrain, as shown in Fig. 6(a). The CPG input 
affects the curve of CPG output to move up when walking 
on uphill. The upper body tilted forward in DSP, but the 
condition does not affect balance, as shown in Fig. 6(b) 
The compensate data of immediate compensation 
controller is shown in Fig. 7. In lateral plane, although the 
convergence speed of predictive compensation control was 
slow and caused the predictive compensation values to be 
smaller than the ideal values, the immediate compensation 
controller remedied the error to make the robot to maintain 
balance by producing larger negative values in the beginning 
of walking on 7°uphill, as shown in Fig. 7(a). In frontal  
plane, the immediate compensation of the right foot is as 
 
Right Leg Left Leg
Leg
t
DSP DSP DSP DSP SSP SSP SSP
Calculate Predict Compensation Value
Apply Predict Compensation Value
Immediate Compensation Controller
  
Figure 4. The working phase of two controllers 
5112
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 5. Recorded sensory data during bipedal walking: (a) Y-direction 
rotation angle (AngY), (b) X-direction rotation angle (AngX). 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 6. Recorded predict compensation data during bipedal walking: (a) 
Predictive compensation value on pitch plane, (b) The output of CPG is to 
control the upper-body swing in front-rear direction.  
 
support foot is larger than the value of left foot is as support 
foot on rear section of uphill (positive values are larger than 
negative values), in order to let the robot cannot fall to the 
direction of right, as shown in Fig. 7(b). 
We calculated and recorded the ZMP of the robot in the 
experiments to verify the stability of NAO when walking 
from flat to 7° Uphill. The recorded ZMP trajectories are 
shown in Fig. 8. In Fig. 8, the stable regions of ZMP are 
depicted by the solid red line. It can be seen that the robot 
kept walking stably on 7° Uphill using the proposed 
controller. However, without control the robot fell and the 
ZMP moved out of the sable region in SSP at the start 7° 
Uphill. The recorded sensory data  are shown in Fig. 9. In 
Fig. 9, we see that without control the robot fell to the right 
side, because of the upper body of robot rotated too much to 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 7. Recorded immediate compensation data during bipedal walking: 
(a) Immediate compensation value on pitch plane, (b) Immediate 
compensation value on roll plane. 
 
right and caused the ZMP trajectory to move outside the 
stable region of the left foot in SSP. Furthermore, we see in 
Fig. 8(b) and Fig. 9(a) that without control the robot fell 
backward, because of the upper body of robot tilted 
backward too much to cause the ZMP trajectory to move 
outside the stable region. On the contrary, the ZMP 
trajectories are in the stable region for the robot walking on 
the same slope with the proposed compensation controller. 
From the above experiments, we verified that the 
predictive compensation controller can make the robot to 
obtain initially stability when encounter a sloped surface. 
The predictive compensation values are accurate and they 
converge to within 2°. Although the convergence speed of 
predictive compensation is still slow, the immediate 
compensation controller provides the fast immediate 
correction to allow the robot to maintain balance. 
Furthermore, the immediate compensation controller can 
maintain the swing amplitude in Y-direction of the upper-
body to allow the robot not to be affect by the inertia force of 
CoG in the Y-direction. Hence, we consider the predictive 
compensation controller and the immediate compensation 
controller are effective to let the robot maintain walking 
balance on unknown slope surfaces. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this work, a walking pattern is generated to combine 
multiple CPGs in SSP and the trajectory motion of CoG of 
the upper body in DSP to achieve stable static walking. We 
have developed a method to determine the relationship of the 
slope of terrain and the upper-body pose, in order to generate 
the predictive compensation to adjust the tilt angle of the 
upper body for next walking period. The immediate 
compensation scheme corrects the pose of upper body to let 
the swing of upper body keep stably with the walking 
trajectory. The experimental results show that the suggested 
control system can make the biped robot to walk successfully 
on unknown slopes. For NAO robot, the proposed method  
5113
 
 
Figure 8. Recorded ZMP trajectory on X-direction and Y-direction. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 9. Recorded sensory data during bipedal walking: (a) Y-direction 
rotation angle (AngY), (b) X-direction rotation angle (AngX). 
 
can allow it to walk on unknown slopes between -7° to 7°. 
The method can be applied to other biped robot in general 
without other special sensors. 
In the future, we will build an accurate relationship 
between variation of sensing information and effect of 
compensation control in order to directly correct walking 
pattern. We will use the foot force sensors to detect the force 
of the swing as foot landing, and add the landing controller 
to reduce the disturbance from impact of swing as foot 
landing. It is hoped that the time of DSP in real environment 
can be shortened. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Ogino, H. Toyama and M. Asada, “Stabilizing Biped Walking on 
Rough Terrain based on the Compliance Control,” in Proc. of 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robot and Systems, 
San Diego, CA, USA, Oct 29- Nov 2, 2007, pp.4047-4052. 
[2] Jian Li and Weidong Chen, “ Modeling and Control for a Biped 
Robot on Uneven Surfaces,” in Proc. of IEEE International 
Conference on Decision and Control, Shanghai, China, 2009, 
pp.2960-2965. 
[3] J. Duysens, Van de Crommert and Henry WAA., “Neural Control of 
Locomotion. Part 1: the Central Pattern Generator from Cats to 
Humans,” Gait and Posture, Vol.7, No.3, pp.131–141, 1998. 
[4] M. Wang, L. Sun, P. Yuan and Q. Meng, “Periodicity Locomotion 
Control Based on Central Pattern Generator,” in Proc. of the 6
th
 
World Congress on Intelligent Control and Automation, Dalian, 
China, June 21-23, 2006, pp.3144-3148. 
[5] L. Righetti and A. J. Ijspeert, “Pattern Generators with Sensory 
Feedback for Control of Qu adruped Locomotion,” in Proc. of IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Pasadena, CA, 
USA, May 19-23, 2008, pp. 819-824. 
[6] H. Kimura, Y. Fukuoka and A. H. Cohen, “Biologically Inspired 
Adaptive Dynamic Walking of a Quadruped Robot,” in Proc. of 8th 
International Conference on the Simulation of Adaptive Behavior, Jul. 
2004 , LA, USA, pp. 201–210. 
[7] Chengju Liu, Qijun Chen and Danwei Wang, “CPG -Inspired 
Workspace Trajectory Generation and Adaptive Locomotion Control 
for Quadruped Robots,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics-Part B:Cybernetics, vol. 41, no. 3, June 2011, pp.867-
880. 
[8] Y. Fukuoka, H. Kimura and Avis H. Cohen, “Adaptive Dynamic 
Walking of a Quadruped Robot on Irregular Terrain Based on 
Biological Concepts,” The International Journal of Robotics 
Research, Vol. 22, No. 3-4, pp. 187-202, 2003. 
[9] T. Mori, Y. Nakamura, M. A. Sato and S. Ishii, “ Reinforcement 
Learning for a CPG-driven Biped Robot,” in AAAI, 2004, pp.623-630. 
[10] T. Luksch and K. Berns, “Control of Bipedal Walking Exploi ting 
Postural Reflexes and Passive Dynamics,” in Proc. of IEEE 
international conference on applied bionics and biomechanics 
(ICABB), Venice, Italy, 2010. 
[11] M. Ishida, S. Kato, M. Kanoh and H. Itoh, “ Generating Locomotion 
for Biped Robots based on the Dynamic Passivization of Joint 
Control,” in Proc. of the IEEE International Conference on System, 
Man, and Cybernetics, San Antonio, USA, October, 2009, pp.3157-
3162. 
[12] Krister Wolff, Jimmy Pettersson, Almir Heralic' and Mattias Wahde, 
“Structural Evolution of Central Pattern Generators for Bipedal 
Walking in 3D Simulation,” in Proc, of IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, Taipei, Taiwan, 2006, 
pp.227-234. 
[13] N. Sadati and K. A. Hamed, “ Neural Control of a Fully Actuated 
Biped Robot,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Robotics 
and Biomimetics, December 17-20. 2006, Kunming, China, pp. 1299–
1304 
[14] G. Endo, J. Nakanishi, J. Morimoto, and G. Cheng, “Experimental 
Studies of a Neural Oscillator for Biped Locomotion with QRIO,” in 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, April. 
2005, Barcelona, Spain, pp. 596–602. 
[15] G. Endo, J. Nakanishi, T. Matsubara, J. Morimoto and G. Cheng, 
“Learning CPG -based Biped Locomotion with a Policy Gradient 
Method: Application to a Humanoid Robot,” The International 
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 213-228, 2008. 
[16] K. Matsuoka, “Sustained Oscillations Generated by Mutually 
Inhibiting Neurons with Adaptation,” Biological Cybernetics, Vol. 52, 
pp. 367–376, 1985. 
[17] K. Matsuoka, “Mechanisms of Frequency and Pattern Control in the 
Neural Rhythm Generators,” Biological Cybernetics, Vol. 56, pp. 
345–353, 1987. 
[18] Yuta Hoshino, Chenglong Fu and Ken Chen, “ A Passive Walking 
Strategy for a Biped Robot with a Large Mass Torso by a Spring and 
a Damper,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Mechatronics and 
Automation, Beijing, China, 2011, pp.1269-1274. 
 
5114
