Extracting Kinematic Background Knowledge from Interactions
Using Task-Sensitive Relational Learning
Sebastian H¬ ofer Tobias Lang Oliver Brock
Abstract? To successfully manipulate novel objects, robots
must rst acquire information about the objects' kinematic
structure. We present a method for learning relational kine-
matic background knowledge from exploratory interactions
with the world. As the robot gathers experience, this back-
ground knowledge enables the acquisition of kinematic world
models with increasing efciency. Learning such background
knowledge, however, proves difcult, especially in complex,
feature-rich domains. We present a novel, task-sensitive rela-
tional rule learner and demonstrate that it is able to learn
accurate kinematic background knowledge in domains where
other approaches fail. The resulting background knowledge is
more compact and generalizes better than that obtained with
existing approaches.
I. INTRODUCTION
The kinematic structure of everyday objects is generally
linked to their functional use (e.g. scissors, doors, drawers,
wheels, buttons, etc.). To gain access to an object placed
inside a cupboard (see Fig. 1), for example, a robot needs
to open the doors of the cupboard, i.e., it must possess
knowledge of the cupboard's degrees of freedom (DOF) so
as to be able to actuate them. If the robot does not have
an a priori kinematic world model, as is the case in mobile
manipulation applications, the robot must discover DOF of
novel objects. In many realistic scenarios, this can only be
achieved by physically interacting with those objects.
We present a method for the efcient extraction of kine-
matic background knowledge from interactions with the
world. By kinematic background knowledge we refer to
a relational description of regularities in the world that
reliably predict the presence of DOF. This stands in contrast
to the kinematic model of the world, which describes the
kinematic relationship between rigid bodies and their spatial
relationship. Kinematic background knowledge is necessary
for the efcient acquisition of kinematic models.
We build on prior work on learning to extract kinematic
models from interactions [1]. We extend that work in im-
portant regards. Whereas previously all experiences were
stored and a nearest-neighbor retrieval was used to generalize
experience to novel objects, we now analyze gathered expe-
rience to extract kinematic background knowledge, forming
a relational description of regularities in the world. In other
All authors are with the Robotics and Biology Laboratory, Technische
Universit¬ at Berlin, Germany
We gratefully acknowledge nancial support by the Alexander von
Humboldt foundation through an Alexander von Humboldt professorship
(funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research) and
through the First-MM project (European Commission,FP7-ICT-248258). We
would like to thank Sebastian Koch and Dennis Loeben for their work on
the simulation framework.
plane
blue
knob
handle
o3
rigid
frame
o1
plane
o4
o2
key
o6
rigid
rigid
handle
o6
horizontal red
rigid
o5
prismatic
pull away
o4
frame
Fig. 1. Relational representation of a complex articulated object: the doors
and drawers have different locking mechanisms requiring the sequential
invocation of specic degrees of freedom to open the door (e.g., turn the
key before the door opens). The relational representation is shown as a
graph with yellow boxes denoting objects, beige ovals unary relations and
green ovals binary relations. An action relation between a simulated robot
hand and the red drawer is shown in blue.
words, we learn a state transition model of the world that ex-
plains the experiences. As the experiments in Section VI will
demonstrate, this innovation accelerates learning, improves
generalization, and produces a more compact representation
of kinematic background knowledge. Furthermore, the novel
approach is able to address domains of higher complexity.
From an application perspective, this step towards experi-
mental domains of realistic complexity represents the rst
main contribution. It is achieved by applying for the rst
time rule-based learning to this domain.
Our method for extracting a compact, relational rule set
from interaction experience is based on a symbolic model
learner for stochastic domains [2]. The second main contri-
bution of this paper is the extension of this learner to become
task-sensitive: Experiences obtained in realistic environments
can exhibit a large number of regularities, but only very few
of them will be relevant to the particular task at hand. For
example, the number of doors in the cupboard in Fig. 1 does
in general not provide information about DOF. By making
the learner task-sensitive, it is able to focus on learning rules
relevant to the task at hand. As we will see in experiments
in Section VI, this enables us to handle domains in which a
task-ignorant learner fails.
II. RELATED WORK
a) Perception and Manipulation: To guide its discovery
of DOF in the world, the robot has to select interaction
points in the environment. This can be achieved with special-
purpose object detectors [3] or machine learning-based ap-
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4342
proaches on RGB or 3-D range data [4], [5]. However, such
?single-point? approaches cannot handle kinematic structures
requiring sequential actions. If the specic object category is
known, policies for these sequential actions can be designed
by hand, for example, in the context of doors [6]. We address
the problem when not all object categories can be known
precisely in advance.
A number of approaches permit the perception of DOF
from visual or RGB-D data [7]?[9]. In these approaches, the
interaction points are given a priori or specied heuristically,
i.e. they do not address the selection of interaction points
for exploration. A promising solution to this problem is to
estimate the information gain of actions for minimizing un-
certainty has been proposed [10]. Since this kind of methods
has not yet fully matured in our context of relational learning,
we use a simpler method to generate efcient exploration
by rewarding the agent for discovering new knowledge [1],
resembling the idea of intrinsic motivation [11].
b) Learning World Models: Planning of interactions
requires information about the world. This information can
be acquired from experience. It can be gathered through
physical simulations and then represented in graphical mod-
els [12]. A different approach formalizes symbolic models
of sensorimotor experience and behavior as Object-Action-
Complexes (OAC) [13]. Similar to our approach, OAC use
STRIPS-like relational rules for world modeling, but they
do not address the problem of learning compact and general
models from experience.
c) Reinforcement Learning: The idea of learning mod-
els from interaction is tightly linked to reinforcement learn-
ing (RL). In RL, the choice of state, action and transition
function is crucial for learning success. In this work, we
focus on learning a transition function from experience. One
core idea is to take the task-specic reward structure of the
domain into account for learning the transition function. Sim-
ilar ideas have been applied in RL in the context of temporal
difference learning [14]. However, these approaches only
work when the optimal state representation can be expressed
by a vector of xed dimensionality. The domains we address
in this paper are not amenable to this representation.
d) Relational Learning: Relational reinforcement
learning (RRL) overcomes the state dimensionality problem
discussed above by using rst-order logic to represent states
and actions [15]. Researchers have developed approaches
for model-free RRL, e.g. using relational regression to the
Q-function [16], as well as model-based RRL, by learning a
relational transition model and using it for planning [2], [17].
The disadvantage of the model-free approach is its task-
specicity: since the resulting Q-function merges domain
(state transitions) and task (reward) knowledge, the solution
is only applicable to one task. The model-based approach
does not have this problem, but the learned transition
function might fail to capture task-relevant aspects of the
state space. We therefore suggest to learn a task-sensitive
relational transition model to balance the task-sensitivity of
model-free and the generality of model-based RRL.
III. BACKGROUND ON RELATIONAL LEARNING
A. Relational Markov Decision Process
We will now introduce the relational Markov decision
process which allows us to formalize the problem of extract-
ing kinematic background knowledge. A relational Markov
decision process (RMDP) is dened as (S;A;T;r) with
states S, actions A, transition probabilities T , and rewards r.
Relational MDPs differ from normal MDPs by employing a
relational representation of states and actions.
1) Relational States: Every state corresponds to a set of
positive and negated literals, which each take a number of ar-
guments. An example for a binary literal isattached(o
1
;o
2
)
(objects o
1
and o
2
are attached to each other). By combining
literals, we can describe complex scenes. For example, we
describe the upper right part of the cupboard in Fig. 1,
consisting of a wooden frame o
4
, a door o
1
, a key o
2
, and a
knob o
3
, as follows:
blue(o
1
);plane(o
1
);key(o
2
);attached(o
1
;o
2
);rigid(o
1
;o
2
)
handle(o
3
);knob(o
3
);attached(o
1
;o
3
);rigid(o
1
;o
3
);
frame(o
4
);attached(o
1
;o
4
);rigid(o
1
;o
4
);:::
(1)
All other literals are implicitly false.
2) Relational Actions: A relational action corresponds to
a positive literal, for example pushUp(o
1
) (push up object
o
1
) or pullAway(o
1
;o
2
) (pull object o
1
away from o
2
).
3) Experiences: By interacting with the world, the robot
collects experiences. We dene an experience as a quadruplet
(s
pre
;a;s
post
;r) consisting of predecessor state s
pre
2 S,
action a2 A, successor state s
post
2 S, and reward r2R.
In the following, we denote a set of experiences byE.
B. Relational Rules
Model-based reinforcement learning attempts to deduce
the transition function T from experiences in order to com-
pute a policy. We learn a relational transition function?a
rule setR?from a set of experiencesE [2].
The relational rule learner infers a set of noisy indeter-
ministic deictic (NID) rules R from E. NID rules are a
more expressive, probabilistic version of STRIPS rules. Their
probabilistic nature explicitly accounts for uncertainty and
failures in unstructured environments. A NID rule consists
of a context, an action, and a set of outcomes, each associated
with a probability:
CONT EXT : handle(X);frame(Z);attached(X;Y);attached(Y;Z)
ACT ION : pullAway(X;Y)
OUTCOMES :
8
>
<
>
:
0:59 revolute(Y;Z);:rigid(Y;Z)
0:40 / 0
0:01 noise
(2)
Note that NID rules can have noise outcomes in order to
ignore experiences with unexpected effects (e.g., failures in
perception or action). Also note that an NID rule removes
reference to concrete objects o
1
;o
2
;::: by substituting vari-
ables X;Y;:::
How do we apply NID rules to states and experiences?
Intuitively, we say an NID rule r2R covers a state s and an
action a if we can substitute the variables in r such that
4343
its context and action match with s and a. For example,
the NID rule in Eq. 2 covers example state 1 and action
pullAway(o
3
;o
1
).
C. Rule Learning
The exact solution to the rule induction problem was
shown to be NP-complete, rendering the computation of a
globally optimal set of rules practically infeasible for large
experience sets. Therefore, Pasula et al. [2] restated the
problem as an optimization problem and solved it (non-
optimally) using a greedy hill-climbing procedure.
The learner starts with a rule set containing only one
rule with an empty and a noise outcome. It then iteratively
generates new candidate rule sets by applying different
operators which add, alter, and remove rules from the rule
set. Every candidate rule set is then evaluated with respect to
a score function and the best candidate is repeatedly selected
until a local maximum of the score function is reached. The
default score function for a rule setR is dened as follows:
S(R)=
Œ
(s;a;s
0
)2E
logP(s
0
js;r
s;a
) a
Œ
r2R
PEN(r); (3)
where r
s;a
is the uniquely covering rule for (s;a). The
rst term maximizes the log-likelihood of the experiences
given the rule set; it increases as the rule set explains the
experiences more exactly. The second term is a regularization
term penalizing complex rule sets. The overall penalty is
obtained by summing the penalty PEN(r) of each rule r,
dened as the number of literals appearing in a rule. The
parameter a scales the inuence of the regularization term
and trades off how accurate the rule set is versus how
compact it is. The rule learner has an additional parameter
p
min
to control the probability of subsuming an experience
not explained by the rule set under the noise outcome of
some rule, rather than creating a new rule to explain it.
IV. TASK-SENSITIVE LEARNING FROM INTERACTION
We now extend the relational rule learner to allow task-
sensitive rule learning. At the same time, we instantiate the
general learning algorithm to our specic task: extracting
kinematic background knowledge from interaction.
A. Relational Representation
In our experiments, we present different articulated objects
to the robot. The robot's goal is to detect all joints of
presented objects with the least possible number of actions.
It achieves this by extracting task-specic regularities from
its experience and by applying this knowledge to select
subsequent actions.
To model the learning problem as a relational Markov
decision process, we now dene states, actions and the state
transition function.
1) State: The relational state includes two pieces of
information: (i) visual information about the object and
(ii) the robot's current belief about the kinematic model of
the objects present in the scene.
We assume that visual information is generated by a
perception system which gives a segmentation of the scene
into objects (or rigid bodies) o
j
and annotates each part
with different features, such as their color, size, and spatial
relationships. Every feature is encoded using a relational
symbol.
Initially, the robot assumes rigid bodies to be rigidly
connected, captured by commutative literalrigid(o
i
;o
j
) for
parts o
i
and o
j
. Similarly, the robot denotes a belief about
a prismatic joint using the binary literal prismatic(o
i
;o
j
)
and the unary literals isPrismatic(o
i
), isPrismatic(o
j
).
Revolute joints are encoded using the literals revolute and
isRevolute.
A partial example of a state representation is shown as a
graph in Fig. 1 and as a logic formula in Eq. 1.
2) Action: The robot can act upon an object by pushing,
pulling, or rotating a rigid body. We dene a set of
unary actions with respect to a global reference frame
(pushUp;pushDown;:::) and a set of binary actions with
respect to a reference frame specied by the two rigid bodies
(pushTowards, pullAway, pushPerpendicularForward,
pushPerpendicularBackward, rotateClockwise,
rotateCounterClockwise;:::). The local reference frame
is dened by gravity and the line connecting the center
of mass of the rst rigid body to the closest point on the
second rigid body.
3) State Transition: After executing an action, the state
of the world and the robot's belief state change. The robot
updates its own state by incorporating visual changes (taken
care of by the perception system) as well as updating the
robot's belief about the kinematic model. To update this
model, the robot observes how object parts move relative to
each other during an interaction. If two parts move together,
the robot assumes a rigid connection. If they move in a
prismatic or revolute motion, the robot inserts the relation
indicating the corresponding joint to its kinematic model.
The new kinematic model corresponds to the new state in
the relational MDP which is the belief state of the robot. For
example, if the robot detects a new prismatic joint between
parts o
i
and o
j
, it removes the rigid(o
i
;o
j
) literal and
adds the literals prismatic(o
i
;o
j
), isPrismatic(o
i
) and
isPrismatic(o
j
). Details of how to analyze relative motion
can be found in [7].
4) Rewards: The robot detects joints when relative motion
between objects exceeding a threshold occurs. The threshold
imitates limitations of real-world sensing. When a joint is
detected for the rst time, the robot receives a reward of
r = 1, otherwise r = 0:1 (cost of an action). Hence, the
robot maximizes its rewards by executing actions that expose
unseen joints.
B. Task-Sensitive Score Function
We now describe how we can enhance the rule learner
described in III-C to learn rules sets in a task-sensitive
manner. The learner's default score function (Eq. 3) does not
consider rewards. This makes it difcult for an autonomous
robot to focus on learning task relevant knowledge. Consider
again the object from Fig. 1. The blue door on the upper right
can only be opened after the key (part o
2
) has been turned.
4344
However, the default score function strives for compactness
and comes up with the rule in Eq. 2. Unfortunately, this rule
does not capture the key opening mechanism, and leaves the
robot clueless about how to reliably open the door.
Our main insight is that the rule in Eq. 2 is task-ignorant:
the rule does not make an effort to distinguish whether the
task is achieved and not. We therefore want to modify the
score function used in relational rule set learning so that rules
are favored for which similar rewards are associated with all
outcomes (i.e. split Eq. 2 in two rules with more precise
preconditions). This ensures that the selection of a rule can
help to maximize reward.
We dene a new task-sensitive score function as follows:
S
r
(R)= S(R) b
Œ
r2R
Var
e2Ej
r
(reward(e)); (4)
where Var denotes the sample variance andEj
r
denotes all
experiences inE covered by rule r. Intuitively speaking, we
introduce a new term to penalize rules that cover a subset
of experiencesEj
r
with very different rewards. This term
counteracts the compactness objective and allows the learner
to model task-relevant properties in more detail. Although
the exact choice of the term is heuristic, it resembles a
feature selection criterion previously considered in the con-
text of temporal difference learning [14]. As we will see
in Section VI the modication of the scoring function has
tremendous impact on learning performance.
Note that the score function can be easily adapted to cope
with several different tasks (reward functions) by adding one
summation over the reward variances per reward function.
V. SIMULATED RELATIONAL WORLDS
To evaluate our approach, we performed experiments with
two different types of worlds, each exhibiting regularities
pertaining to kinematic DOF. Experiments are conducted
in simulation using a physical simulation engine based on
NVIDIA PhysX
TM
and OpenSceneGraph. Performing simu-
lation experiments allows us to conduct the large number
of experiments required to evaluate the different learning
algorithms. The simulator implements the necessary percep-
tual and action capabilities to perform the experiments. The
physical realization of these capabilities is outside of the
scope of this paper. However, we believe these capabilities
have been demonstrated in real-world scenarios as part of
the state of the art.
A. Kinematic Chain World
The rst world consists of kinematic chains of different
lengths [1] as shown in Fig. 2. Every chain exhibits the
same regularity: it has two coupled joints mimicking a door
locking mechanism. The rst joint is revolute and is located
at one end of the chain. The second joint is prismatic and
is located at a random location in the chain, but always
between a yellow and a red link. To unlock (and therefore
be able to discover) the prismatic joint, the robot has to rst
actuate the revolute joint (i.e., push the door handle). All
other connections are rigid, size information does not matter
and was randomly assigned to the parts as a distraction.
(a) (b)
Fig. 2. Robot interacting with kinematic chains (seeing what the robot
sees): A locked prismatic joint is located between the yellow and the red
block. It is unlocked when the revolute joint is moved by 45 degrees. In
this picture the actual joints are invisible as they are for the robot.
We give the robot a set of primitive relations to
conceptualize the objects: unary relations encoding color
and size (yellow;red;white;small;middle;big), the bi-
nary spatial relation right indicating the direct right
neighbor of a box (?right? is dened with respect to
the robot's coordinate frame); additionally, we provide
unary relations denoting the number of left/right neigh-
bors (numLeft and numRight) and the right and left
most boxes (leftMost and rightMost). We also pro-
vide conjunctive relations for all pairs of unary rela-
tions such as rightMostBig;leftMostBig;yellowBig,
etc. This method is similar to what is achieved by feature
expansion in machine learning, as it increases the amount of
information that the learner can use. Additionally, the robot
uses the joint type relations described in Section IV-A.1.
B. Furniture World
Fig. 3. Different opening mechanisms in the furniture world, from left to
right: knob with key (doors only), revolute handle (doors only), knob (doors
and drawers), vertical and horizontal handle (drawers only).
In the second world, the agent interacts with realistic ob-
jects of higher complexity (see Fig. 1), inspired by modular
furniture. Each world consists of a cupboard with one to
four elements: drawers or doors of four different colors. Each
element exhibits a different opening mechanism (Fig. 3). A
drawer can be opened by simply pulling the attached handle.
A door exhibits one of three mechanisms: either a pullable
knob, a handle which has to be pushed down before opening
the door, or a knob with a key which has to be turned to
unlock the door. Moreover, the door joint is either located at
the left or the right. All these variations result in a set of more
than 1 million possible cupboards. In our experiments, we
randomly sample a set of such cupboards and let the robot
interact with them to extract the regularities for different
opening methods. The relations for these objects are listed
in Table I.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We conducted experiments in the two simulated worlds to
show that task sensitivity is indispensable for learning kine-
matic background knowledge for manipulating articulated
objects. We show that (i) the task-sensitive score function
4345
TABLE I
RELATIONS AND FUNCTIONS IN THE 3D EXPERIMENT
Relation/Function Arity Explanation
Object properties
frame;handle;plane;knob;key 1 object type
black;red;blue;green 1 color
horizontal;vertical 1 orientation of the object
singleAttached 1 handle connected to the
doubleAttached 1 plane at one or two points
keyAttached 1 true if key attached to plane
Spatial properties
attached 2 is attached to (commutative)
extracts better rule sets than the default score function,
(ii) the task-sensitive rule learner generalizes faster to unseen
objects of the same class than nearest-neighbor learning,
and (iii) the resulting representation is more compact. We
compare the following learning strategies:
(i) Nearest-neighbor strategy based on subgraph isomor-
phism (NN) (for a detailed description see [1])
(ii) Default rule learner (see Section III)
(iii) Task-sensitive (TS) rule learner (see Section IV)
(iv) Random (selects actions uniformly at random)
1) Experiments: Every experiment consists of a set of
N episodes. During an episode we present a new object
to the agent, selected uniformly at random from the set of
all possible objects. An episode ends when the robot has
discovered all of the object's degrees of freedom. All learners
use the same object in a particular episode. The NN learner
and the two rule learners update their experience after every
interaction. Additionally, the rule learners compute a new
rule set every time they get an experience which is not
covered by their current rule set.
2) Action Selection: The NN learner and the rule learners
use an e-greedy policy with simulated annealing for action
selection. They select a random action with probability
0 < e < 1 and a greedy action otherwise. We decrease
e in each episode n according to the following function:
e(n) = exp(3
n
N
). The rule learners select a greedy action
by searching for all rules which cover the current state
and selecting the rule/action with the highest value. We
dene a rule's value as the average reward of all covered
experiences, weighed by the outcome probabilities. The NN
learner selects a greedy action by matching the current
state with all experiences using subgraph isomorphism and
applying the experience associated with the best match [1].
3) Rewards: The robot receives rewards as explained in
Section IV-A.4. In the kinematic world domain the robot
receives an additional reward of r = 5 when it nds both
joints at the end of an episode. The reward for an episode is
the average reward per action.
A. Task-Sensitivity Extracts Better Rule Sets
We now show that the task-sensitive score function allows
the robot to infer better rule sets, i.e., kinematic background
knowledge that captures the regularities of world better.
1) Kinematic Chain World: We compared the learners in
experiments consisting of 30 episodes with objects generated
uniformly at random and averaged the episode reward over
ve independent runs. For the rule learning strategies, we
selected the hyperparameters as a = 10
 5
; p
min
= 10
 7
and
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Episode
 1
0
1
2
3
4
5
Average reward
rule set(ts)
rule set(def)
NN
random
Fig. 4. Comparing different learning strategies in the kinematic chain
world: We see that the task-sensitive rule learner (green) and the nearest-
neighbor strategy (black) perform best as their average rewards approach
the optimal reward of 3.5 towards the end of the experiment.
b = 30. Fig. 4 shows the results. The task-sensitive rule
learner (green) and the nearest-neighbor strategy (black)
perform best, as their average rewards approaches the optimal
reward of 3.5 towards the end of the experiment (two actions
with a reward of 1, each to discover one DOF, the additional
reward of 5, normalized by two, the number of joints). This
means that the task-sensitive rule-learner has ?understood?
the domain and exploits the regularity without explorative
actions. The original rule learner performs poorly. It is side-
tracked by task-irrelevant regularities and, for example, does
not obtain rules describing the locking mechanism. Instead,
it produces a rule to predict that prismatic joints can be found
in 50% of all cases.
2) Furniture World: In the furniture world, we again
conducted experiments with 30 episodes, a different random
object for each episode, and averaged the reward over ve
independent runs. Fig. 5 shows that the task-sensitive rule
learner performs better than the default rule learner.
The task-sensitive rule learner performs best, achieving
an average reward of close to 1.0. An average reward of 1.0
would indicate that the robot has ?understood? the domain
and identies DOF without exploratory actions. There are
two reasons why our learner does not quite achieve the
optimal average reward. First, the e-greedy strategy forces
the robot to select random exploratory actions, sometimes
resulting in suboptimal behavior. Secondly, the stochastic
nature of the object generation, action selection, and rule
learning can by chance generate wrong regularities. For
example, in one experiments the rule learner maintained
rules until the end which take into account the (irrelevant)
color of the doors. This was simply because it had actually
observed this regularity, albeit by chance. However, as soon
as an experience contradicts such a rule, the learner re-
learns a consistent set of rules. In one experiment, the learner
acquired an optimal rule set after only eleven episodes.
B. Rule Learning Generalizes Faster
We now show that the task-sensitive rule learner not only
outperforms the other strategies, but also generalizes faster
from the data to learn kinematic background knowledge
about the given object classes than the NN strategy.
1) Kinematic Chain World: Since the task-sensitive rule
learner and the nearest-neighbor strategy generated compa-
rable results on kinematic chains with four links (Fig. 4),
we evaluated their performance on chains of random lengths
4346
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Episode
 0:4
 0:2
0:0
0:2
0:4
0:6
0:8
1:0
1:2
1:4
Average reward
rule set (ts)
rule set (def)
NN
random
Fig. 5. Comparing different learning strategies in the furniture world:
The task-sensitive rule learner is the only strategy that succeeds at learning
generalizable background knowledge about the world.
between seven and ten, exhibiting the same regularity as
before. We then ran all strategies on these longer chains
while using the kinematic background knowledge obtained
with chains of length four in the previous experiment.
Averaged over 100 random chains of length seven to
ten, the task-sensitive rule learner achieves close to optimal
performance (average number of actions to discover both
joints: 2.1, s = 0:3, optimal reward: 2.0). This again im-
plies that the task-sensitive rule-learner has ?understood? the
domain, exploits the regularities without explorative actions,
and is able to transfer the background knowledge to different
objects in the same domain. In contrast, the NN strategy
fails if the prismatic joint is located too far apart from the
unlocking mechanism, resulting in an average of 5:8 actions
(s = 3:8). In these cases, the matching fails as NN cannot
at the same time match the revolute joint at one end and the
prismatic joint close to the opposite end.
In addition, the task-sensitive rule learner signicantly out-
performs the NN strategy with respect to compactness. The
NN maintains a set of 210.8 (s = 34:9) unique experiences
on average whereas the task-sensitive rule set learner results
in an average of 25.0 (s = 9:6) rules, corresponding to a
compression ratio of 8:4. (Old experiences must be retained
to learn a new rule set as new experiences come in, though.)
2) Furniture World: Fig. 5 shows that the task-sensitive
rule learner outperforms the NN strategy in the furniture
world. Indeed, the NN strategy performs much worse than
in the kinematic chain experiment mainly because of the
complexity of the world. The NN strategy fails to general-
ize its experiences because of the many different possible
combinations of cupboards. Again, the task-sensitive rule
set is much more compact than the set of unique experi-
ences: 567.8 (s = 94:4) unique experiences for NN versus
34.0 (s = 3:8) task-sensitive rules, resulting in an average
compression ratio of 16:7.
The results show that the task-sensitive learner is the
only strategy that generalizes effectively over a limited set
of observations by balancing compactness and accuracy,
and learns suitable kinematic background knowledge for
exploring articulated objects.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presented a method for extracting kinematic
background knowledge from interactions with the world. The
learned relational model captures task-relevant regularities in
the world, enabling predictions about the presence of DOF.
The ability to acquire such kinematic background knowledge
is an important prerequisite for autonomous manipulation of
unknown objects, as it enables robots to efciently discover
DOF. We demonstrated this ability in two simulated domains:
articulated kinematic chains and modular furniture, including
doors and drawers with different locking mechanisms. In the
latter domain, only solvable by our method, accurate and
yet compact kinematic background knowledge was extracted
after experiencing only 30 out of over one million possible
pieces of furniture. The key to the effectiveness of the
proposed method is a novel, task-sensitive relational rule
learner.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Katz, Y . Pyuro, and O. Brock, ?Learning to manipulate articulated
objects in unstructured environments using a grounded relational
representation,? in Robotics: Science and Systems IV, 2008, pp. 254?
261.
[2] H. M. Pasula, L. S. Zettlemoyer, and L. P. Kaelbling, ?Learning sym-
bolic models of stochastic domains,? Journal of Articial Intelligence
Research, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 309?352, 2007.
[3] R. B. Rusu, W. Meeussen, S. Chitta, and M. Beetz, ?Laser-based
perception for door and handle identication,? in International Con-
ference on Advanced Robotics (ICAR), 2009, pp. 1?8.
[4] I. Lenz, H. Lee, and A. Saxena, ?Deep learning for detecting robotic
grasps,? in Robotics: Science and Systems IX, 2013.
[5] H. Nguyen and C. Kemp, ?Autonomously learning to visually detect
where manipulation will succeed,? Auton. Robots, pp. 1?16, 2013.
[6] E. Klingbeil, A. Saxena, and A. Ng, ?Learning to open new doors,? in
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. On Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010,
pp. 2751?2757.
[7] D. Katz and O. Brock, ?Manipulating articulated objects with inter-
active perception,? in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2008, pp. 272?277.
[8] D. Katz, A. Orthey, and O. Brock, ?Interactive perception of articulated
objects,? in Proc. of the 12th Int. Symp. on Experimental Robotics
(ISER), 2010, ser. Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, O. Khatib
and G. S. V . Kumar, Eds. Springer, 2014, vol. 79, pp. 301?315.
[9] J. Sturm, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, ?A probabilistic framework for
learning kinematic models of articulated objects,? Journal of Articial
Intelligence Research, no. 41, pp. 477?526, 2011.
[10] H. van Hoof, O. Kroemer, H. B. Amor, and J. Peters, ?Maximally
informative interaction learning for scene exploration,? in IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. On Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012, pp. 5152?5158.
[11] P.-Y . Oudeyer, F. Kaplan, and V . Hafner, ?Intrinsic motivation systems
for autonomous mental development,? Evolutionary Computation,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 265?286, Apr. 2007.
[12] J. Mugan and B. Kuipers, ?Autonomous learning of high-level states
and actions in continuous environments,? IEEE Transactions on Au-
tonomous Mental Development, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 70?86, 2012.
[13] N. Kr¬ uger, C. Geib, J. Piater, R. Petrick, M. Steedman, F. W¬ org¬ otter,
A. Ude, T. Asfour, D. Kraft, D. Omren, A. Agostini, and R. Dillmann,
?Object-Action Complexes: Grounded abstractions of sensory-motor
processes,? Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 59, no. 10, pp.
740?757, 2011.
[14] J. Piater, S. Jodogne, R. Detry, D. Kraft, N. Kr¬ uger, O. Kroemer,
and J. Peters, ?Learning visual representations for perception-action
systems,? The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 30,
no. 3, pp. 294?307, Jan. 2011.
[15] S. Dzeroski, L. De Raedt, and K. Driessens, ?Relational reinforcement
learning,? Machine Learning, vol. 43, no. 1-2, pp. 7?52, 2001.
[16] K. Driessens and J. Ramon, ?Relational instance based regression for
relational reinforcement learning,? in Int. Conf. on Machine Learning,
vol. 20, Washington, USA, 2003, pp. 123?130.
[17] T. Lang, M. Toussaint, and K. Kersting, ?Exploration in relational
domains for model-based reinforcement learning,? Journal of Machine
Learning Research, vol. 13, pp. 3691?3734, 2012.
4347
