Bio-Inspired Tactile Sensor Sleeve for Surgical Soft Manipulators
S. Sareh, A. Jiang, A. Faragasso, Y . Noh, T. Nanayakkara, Member, IEEE,
P. Dasgupta, L.D. Seneviratne, Member, IEEE, H.A. Wurdemann, K. Althoefer, Member, IEEE
Abstract— Robotic manipulators for Robot-assisted Mini-
mally Invasive Surgery (RMIS) pass through small incisions into
the patient’s body and interact with soft internal organs. The
performance of traditional robotic manipulators such as the da
Vinci Robotic System is limited due to insufﬁcient ﬂexibility of
the manipulator and lack of haptic feedback. Modern surgical
manipulators have taken inspiration from biology e.g. snakes
or the octopus. In order for such soft and ﬂexible arms to
reconﬁgure itself and to control its pose with respect to organs
as well as to provide haptic feedback to the surgeon, tactile
sensors can be integrated with the robot’s ﬂexible structure.
The work presented here takes inspiration from another area
of biology: cucumber tendrils have shown to be ideal tactile
sensors for the plant that they are associated with providing
useful environmental information during the plant’s growth.
Incorporating the sensing principles of cucumber tendrils, we
have created miniature sensing elements that can be distributed
across the surface of soft manipulators to form a sensor network
capable of acquire tactile information. Each sensing element is
a retractable hemispherical tactile measuring applied pressure.
The actual sensing principle chosen for each tactile makes use of
optic ﬁbres that transfer light signals modulated by the applied
pressure from the sensing element to the proximal end of the
robot arm. In this paper, we describe the design and structure
of the sensor system, the results of an analysis using Finite
Element Modeling in ABAQUS as well as sensor calibration
and experimental results. Due to the simple structure of the
proposed tactile sensor element, it is miniaturisable and suitable
for MIS. An important contribution of this work is that the
developed sensor system can be ”loosely” integrated with a soft
arm effectively operating independently of the arm and without
affecting the arm’s motion during bending or elongation.
I. INTRODUCTION
In Robot-assisted Minimally Invasive Surgery (RMIS),
robotic tools enter the body through narrow openings and
manipulate soft organs that can move, deform, or change
in stiffness. Surgical systems such as the da Vinci system
that make use of the traditional robotic manipulation concept
relying on rigid links without integrated force or tactile
sensors have limitations on these laparoscopic and robot-
assisted surgical procedures due to restricted access through
S. Sareh, A. Jiang, A. Faragasso, Y . Noh, T. Nanayakkara,
L.D. Seneviratne, H.A. Wurdemann, and K. Althoefer are with
the Centre for Robotics Research, Department of Informatics,
School of Natural and Mathematical Sciences, King’s College
London, Strand, London WC2R 2LS, UK. sina.sareh,
allen.jiang, angela.faragasso, yohan.noh,
thrish.nanayakkara, lakmal.seneviratne,
helge.wurdemann, kaspar.althoefer@kcl.ac.uk
L.D. Seneviratne is with the Khalifa University Robotics
Institute, Khalifa University, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
lakmal.seneviratne@kustar.ac.ae
P. Dasgupta is with the Department of Urology, Guy’s and St Thomas’
Hospitals, NHS Foundation Trust, Guys Hospital, London SE1 9RT, UK.
prokarurol@gmail.com
(a) (b)
Fig. 1. (a) Cucumber tendril and (b) micrograph of the ventral side of
tendrils [6] which shows Trichoma and Papillae-like tactile sensors
Trocar ports, lack of haptic feedback [1], [2], and difﬁculties
with rigid robot tools operating inside a conﬁned space ﬁlled
with organs [3]. The solid structure of the instrument attached
to the robotic arms and their external articulation make it
problematic to change surgical targets inside the abdomen.
In the case of the da Vinci Surgical System, the surgeons
are not provided with haptic feedback from the interaction
between the powerful and rigid robot arms and the patient’s
tissue - tissue tears can occur as a result [3], [4].
Nature has provided a rich source of inspiration for robotic
scientist wishing to design ﬂexible manipulators [5]. In
particular, the patterns and mechanisms of movement are
signiﬁcant features of microorganisms, animals, and plants
and, hence, a major focus of bio-inspired and bio-mimetic
engineering [7]. These biological mechanisms are capable
of manipulation inside unstructured and conﬁned spaces
and can act as ideal sources of inspiration for the design
of surgical devices with enhanced maneuverability, safety
and intractability. Featuring a high degree of controlled
ﬂexibility in their bodies, these biological systems are highly
adaptable and interact safely with each other and with the
environment [8]. So far, inspiration for surgical tools has
been taken from snakes [9] and octopuses [10], [11]. In
order for such soft and ﬂexible arm to reconﬁgure itself
and to control its pose with respect to organs as well as to
provide haptic feedback to the surgeon, tactile sensors can be
integrated with the robot’s ﬂexible structure. Depending on
the characteristics of the surgical robot arm, tactile sensors
need to accommodate certain features in order to complement
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1454
the manipulator’s structure.
The work presented here takes inspiration from another area
of biology: cucumber tendrils have shown to be ideal tactile
sensors for the plant that they are associated with providing
useful environmental information during the plant’s growth.
The presented sleeve will be developed by considering the
features of the soft modular manipulator which is inspired by
the octopus morphology for RMIS in [11]. The manipulator
is a novel cylinder-shaped device which is manufactured
from Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone with a Shore hardness of 00-
50A (Ecoﬂex 00-50) and covered by an off-the-shelf ﬂexible
braided sheath. This structural design allows omnidirectional
bending, elongation capability, selective stiffness changing,
and passive squeezing when pneumatically actuated via
integrated chambers within the cylinder. The device has an
overall length of 50 mm and an outer diameter of 35 mm with
a minimum elongation capability of 30 %. Section II will
review tactile sensors for stretchable and bendable devices.
In Section III, the key objectives of the proposed tactile
sensor properties will be summarised. Inspiration will be
taken from the sensing mechanism in cucumber tendrils.
The design of the bio-inspired tactile sensor sleeve will
be presented (Section IV). A numerical analysis will be
described in Section V. The calibration process in Section VI
and the experimental results show the potential of this design
concept.
II. BACKGROUND
Researchers have thoroughly explored tactile sensing
systems capable of sensing only at robot’s end-effector.
These include haptic approaches for environmental explo-
ration [12], [13], objects exploration [14], [15], feature
detection e.g. bumps and ridges [16], object recognition [17]
and estimation of object properties [18]. A comprehensive
review can be found in [19].
Distributed tactile sensing along whole robotic manipulators
facilitates distinguishing between distinct force distribution
and contact conﬁguration. For instance, a force in a surgical
robot distributed over a small area produces higher stress and,
therefore, higher potential of damaging organs than the same
force distributed over a large area. Also, distributed tactile
sensors can provide useful information on the geometry and
texture of the contact [20], [21].
A tactile sensing sleeve incorporated to the body of a soft
manipulator is required to be stretchable and conformable.
In [22], a ﬂexible and stretchable tactile skin composed
of conductive fabric and urethane foam is demonstrated.
However, this work does not discuss the sensor output when
the tactile skin is stretched. Some tactile sensors reported
in the literature are ﬂexible, but not stretchable including
the distributed tactile sensor made of conductive fabric and
gel [23]. Examples of stretchable tactile sensors include a
stretchable tactile sensor based on static electricity [24], a
deformation sensitive tactile distribution sensor exploiting
EIT (Electrical Impedance Tomography), which can estimate
the resistivity distribution within an electrical conductor
through measurements from its boundary [25], a stretchable
and multifunctional capacitive sensor composed of gold thin
ﬁlms embedded in rubber [26], and a stretchable skin-
like tactile sensor based on polymeric composites [27], and
sensors based on liquid embedded microchannels [28]. The
EIT based sensing systems consist of electrodes located on
boundaries of the sensing mechanism. Hence, these systems
cannot provide sufﬁcient information about force distribu-
tion, unless a method of “multiple internal electrodes” is
used [29]. Although the ﬂexibility of the sensing mechanism
based on gold-trace stripes and silicone materials in [26]
allows bending and stretching of the sensing device, poor
adhesion between the silicone substrate and thin gold ﬁlms
together with low electrical conductivity of ﬁlm materials
limit the integration of sensor arrays. The sensing system
in [29] is composed of a transparent elastomer ﬁlm em-
bedded in micro-channel of conductive liquid (eGaIn). The
sensing elements exert pressure on the embedded micro-
channel when bending the sensor. The change in the cross-
section area of the micro-channel leads to a change in
electrical resistance. Wang et al. [20] developed an array
of dome-shaped patterned IPMCs based on Flemion, the
perﬂuorocarboxylic acid membrane made by Asahi Glass
Company, taking bio-inspiration from the tactile sensor cells
on the skin of a cucumber tendril. Although, this sensing
mechanism is particularly attractive due to its capability in
sensing multi-degree-of-freedom forces, this sensing device
is not stretchable.
III. OBJECTIVES AND BIO-INSPIRATION
To ensure unique contribution to science and to develop
a novel sensor design and structure which complements
the characteristics of the manipulator in [11], the following
functional requirements are considered for the proposed
tactile sensor sleeve:
1) A single tactile sensor of the sleeve should not be
affected by features of the robot arm such as stiffening,
bending and elongation.
2) For RMIS, the tactile sensor array will need to be
designed for a manipulator diameter of up to 15 mm.
A simple and uncomplicated design of the sensor will
allow the possibility of miniaturisation. A low-cost
disposable steering mechanism would be another non-
obligatory but important objective in RMIS.
In this paper, these requirements have been taken into
account. The scientiﬁc contribution of the design of this
tactile sensor array for soft manipulators will be evaluated
by considering the achievements of these objectives.
As mentioned in Section I, nature has inspired the devel-
opment of robotic devices in many ways. Here, we take
inspiration of cucumber tendrils. Fig. 1(a) shows a cucumber
tendril hooking around its host. Tendrils are used by climbing
plants for support and attachment, generally by twining
around suitable hosts. Rough surfaces are easier to grab on
and, hence, better host candidates. The tactile papillae on
tendrils which are shown in Fig. 1(b) are only 0.8-2.0 m
thick. The biological sensors have a simple dome-shaped
1455
structure. The thickness of the wall is only between 0.3-
0.8 m. Researchers conclude that these papillae function
as tactile receptors [6]. The structure and functionality as a
biological receptor beneﬁts and, thus, is considered for the
development of the tactile sensor sleeve for RMIS.
IV. DESIGN OF THE BIO-INSPIRED TACTILE
SENSOR ARRAY
Inspired by the structure of the distributed tactile sensing
units on the surface of cucurbitaceae, this section explains
the design and fabrication of a sleeve with integrated tendril-
inspired tactile sensors. The individual dome-shaped sensors
are produced using two different materials. Their perfor-
mance will be analysed and compared in Section V and VI.
The tactile sensors are based on ﬁbre-optic light modulation.
Multiple sensors are then integrated into a silicone sleeve.
A. Bio-Inspired Tactile Sensor Design
The design of the proposed individual tactile sensors
is closely inﬂuenced by the tactile papillae in Fig. 1(b).
Fig. 2(a) illustrates the assembly of the bio-inspired sensor.
The base has a 10 mm diameter and 1 mm thickness with
a convex surface to be aligned along the manipulator. It
is manufactured using a rapid prototyping machine (Project
HD-3000 Plus, 3D Systems). The Project rapid prototyping
machine employs a large number of printing jets to print
objects in 3D. Using this machine to manufacture the novel
segment structure of the manipulator allows miniaturisa-
tion. The polymer material used to print the base is non-
conductive ABS polymer (Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene).
A ﬂexible hemi-spherical dome of 8 mm diameter and 4 mm
height (thickness: 1 mm) is mounted on the base. In this
paper, we fabricated two sets of domes using two different
materials: Poly PT Flex rubber with a Shore hardness of
70A and Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone with a Shore hardness
of 00-50A. The properties of the two materials are listed in
Table I.
The proposed tactile sensor uses light intensity modulated
ﬁbre-optics [30]–[32] based on a prismatic tip. Hence, the
base is designed so that it embeds a 1 mm ﬁbre as shown
in Fig 2(a). A mirror is ﬁtted inside the dome which reﬂects
emitted light by the ﬁbre. The intensity of the reﬂected light
will vary when the distance between the ﬁbre tip and mirror
changes due to forces applied to the dome. The ﬁbre tip is
cut at 45
0
angle and polished in order to provide an internal
Optical Fibre Mirror
Base
Flexible Hemi-
Spherical Dome
Force
(a)
Optical Fibre
Mirror 
(inside)
Base
Flexible Hemi-
Spherical Dome
(b)
Fig. 2. (a) CAD drawing and (b) prototype of an assembled single tactile
sensor
(a) (b)
Fig. 3. (a) CAD drawing and (b) prototype of the sensor sleeve with
multiple tactile sensor
reﬂection of 90
0
. The light is moving inside the ﬁbre until
it reaches the prismatic tip and changes its direction by 90
0
before leaving the ﬁbre. Inversely, when the light is reﬂected
back, the light changes the direction by 90
0
once it hits
the prismatic tip and travels along the length of the ﬁbre.
The utilisation of the prismatic tip ﬁbre ensures a planar
structure of the sensor design. More details about this sensing
mechanism can be found in [33]. A prototype with a hemi-
spherical dome made of polyurethane rubber is shown in
Fig. 2(b).
Material
Elongation Shore A
at Break Hardness
Ecoﬂex Supersoft
980 % 00-50
Silicone
Poly PT Flex Rubber 175 % 70
TABLE I
MATERIAL PROPERTIES FOR THE TWO SETS OF THE SENSOR DOME
B. Integration of Multiple Sensors
As mentioned earlier, the entire robot arm is fabricated
from Ecoﬂex 00-50. A braided polyester sheath is used for
the outer membrane which only allows longitudinal extension
of the manipulator.
A sleeve has been designed as shown in Fig. 3(a) to embed
tactile sensors. Ecoﬂex 00-50 is moulded in a cylindrical
shaped tube with a thickness of 1 mm. In order to ﬁt the
stretchable sleeve to the manipulator, the silicone mould has
a 30 mm diameter and 45 mm length. In this paper, 9 sensors
are ﬁxed into equally distributed holes of 7 mm diameter
along the sleeve. Fig. 3(b) shows an assembled prototype
with rubber-dome sensors embedded into the sensor sleeve.
The optical ﬁbres are connected to a Keyence Digital Fi-
breoptic Sensor which measures the light intensity variation
between the emitted and received light when applying a
force to the sensor. In order to feed the optical ﬁbres during
bending and elongation, the ﬁbres are radially aligned into
the gaps of the crimped sheath.
V. FINITE ELEMENT ANALYSIS
A Finite Element Model (FEM) of the entire structural
system has been set up in order to compare the behaviour
1456
of the two types of individual bio-inspired sensors (Poly PT
Flex rubber and Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone) when subjected
to displacement and traction force. The analysis was run
using the commercial FE software ABAQUS/Explicit 6.12-
3. The parts were created using SolidWorks Simulia and
imported to ABAQUS for mesh generation, material property
assignment and stress analysis. The focus was then shifted
to a unit cell which faithfully represents the whole model in
all its important features. As the focus is on the comparative
study between two cases, the curved shell element base of
the single sensor is replaced by a continuum plate part of
Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone. The FEM of the single tactile
sensor has been studied and the evolution of stress and strain
in the part is depicted. Fig. 4(a) and 4(b) show the contour
of von Mises stress of a in-plane loaded tactile sensor unit.
It can be conspicuously seen that when the homogeneous
part (in case of using Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone for the
sensor dome) is loaded in plane the hemispherical outgrowth
deforms substantially and takes the form of an ellipsoid
with the largest axis of the base cross section aligning with
the direction of tensile load. When on the other hand the
heterogeneous model (in case of using Poly PT Flex rubber
for the sensor dome) is loaded in plane, no considerable
deformation of the hemisphere is observed. These results are
well in line with intuition.
VI. CALIBRATION AND EXPERIMENTAL
RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
To calibrate the light intensity of the tactile sensor with
applied force, experiments were performed on the Ecoﬂex
Supersoft silicone and Poly PT Flex rubber sensors. The
experiment consisted of loading and unloading the tactile
sensor with a 4 mm deﬂection (see Fig. 5). The resulting
load force was measured by an ATI Nano17 Force/Torque
Von Mises Stress
Tactile Sensor
(EcoFlex 00-50)
Sensor Sleeve
(EcoFlex 00-50)
von Mises Stress
Tactile Sensor
(Poly PT Flex rubber)
Sensor Sleeve
(EcoFlex 00-50)
(a)
Von Mises Stress
Tactile Sensor
(EcoFlex 00-50)
Sensor Sleeve
(EcoFlex 00-50)
von Mises Stress
Tactile Sensor
(Poly PT Flex rubber)
Sensor Sleeve
(EcoFlex 00-50)
(b)
Fig. 4. Mises stress of in-plane loaded unit cells for an individual tactile
sensor using (a) Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone and (b) Poly PT Flex rubber
implemented into the silicone sleeve
sensor. The loading phase was controlled by a motorised
linear module at a speed of 0.25
mm
s
. At the 4 mm deﬂection
point, the module pauses for 5 s before transitioning to the
unloading phase. The unloading phase is identical to the
load phase, with the exception that the module is moving
in the opposite direction to its initial position. Data from
the force sensor and light intensity meter were recorded
through a DAQ card at 1 kHz. Five trials were performed
for each sensor type, and with the average and variability of
each point plotted against the deﬂection distance. Hysteresis
was calculated by taking the area between the loading and
unloading curves, and normalizing it by dividing it by the
loading curve.
B. Calibration Results
Fig. 6(a) shows the load and unload forces measured by
the force sensor, and Fig. 6(b) shows the light intensity
measured by the light intensity meter. For both the rubber and
silicone tactile sensors, saturation occurs from the 2.8 mm
point, and thus higher forces were not recorded. From
Fig. 7(a), the tactile sensor made of Poly PT Flex rubber
exhibited a fairly linear proﬁle, reaching a peak of 11.70 N
with a hysteresis value of 0.50. The sensor made of Ecoﬂex
Supersoft silicone displayed a nonlinear behaviour, and had
a peak force of 4.50 N with a hysteresis value of 0.44. The
average variability of the rubber and silicone sensors were
0.83 and 0.36 N, respectively.
The light intensity data in Fig. 7(b) are similar to Fig. 7(a),
though exhibit more nonlinear behaviour. Fig. 8(a) shows
the Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone calibration curve between the
measured light intensity and force as the sensor is pressed.
The proﬁle is linear between 1080 and 1260 Lux (0.38 to
0.57 N). For the Poly PT Flex rubber calibration curve, as
seen in Fig. 8(b), the linear region occurs between 2300 and
3740 Lux (3.71 to 7.24 N). Thus, the stiffness of the tactile
sensor material affects the measurable force range; the stiffer
polyurethane rubber is not only capable of measuring higher
forces, but with a wider range, as well. It should be noted
 ATI Nano17 Sensor
Motorised Linear Module
Single Tactile Sensor
Fig. 5. Experimental setup for sensor calibration with a ATI Nano17
Force/Torque sensor using a motorised linear module
1457
(a) (b)
Fig. 6. Raw data for (a) force and (b) light intensity for a single tactile
sensor
that the light intensity for the silicone and rubber sensors do
not exhibit at the same value at zero force. This is due to
the light reﬂectivity of the materials; the rubber reﬂects more
ambient light than the silicone.
C. Experimental Elongation and Bending Behaviour
The sensing sleeve with integrated bio-inspired receptors
using Poly PT Flex rubber hemi-spherical domes is ﬁtted to
the entirely soft manipulator presented in [11]. Fig. 9 shows
the results during elongation and bending. In the relaxed
conﬁguration, the manipulator has a length of ca. 50 mm.
The manipulator is pneumatically actuated to a length of
ca. 64 mm by 28 %. The sleeve stretches consistently and
re-positions each single tactile sensor without affecting its
shape. The right image of Fig. 9 shows how the tactile sensor
sleeve allows the manipulator to bend.
In order to compare an integrated Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone
and Poly PT Flex rubber dome when subject to stress,
the sleeve with three tactile sensors is loaded as shown in
Fig. 10. The sleeve is elongated from its relaxed state of
60 mm to about 80 mm by over 30 %. The experimental
results conﬁrm the Finite Element Analysis in Section V
that the heterogeneous sensor sleeve show no considerable
deformation of the hemi-spherical domes.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has presented a ﬂexible and stretchable tactile
sensor sleeve for modern soft manipulators in RMIS. The
structure and functionality of tactile papillae on cucumber
tendrils inspired the design of a single tactile sensor. Two sets
of sensors were assembled using two different materials for
the sensing dome: Poly PT Flex rubber with a Shore hardness
of 70A and Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone with a Shore hardness
(a) (b)
Fig. 7. Deﬂection versus (a) force and (b) light intensity for a single tactile
sensor
(a) (b)
Fig. 8. Calibration curves: Light intensity versus force for (a) a Ecoﬂex
Supersoft silicone and (b) Poly PT Flex rubber hemi-spherical dome
of 00-50A. The integration of multiple individual receptors
into a silicone sleeve made of Ecoﬂex Supersoft silicone
has been described. The sensing technique is based on light
intensity modulation using ﬁbre optics with a prismatic
tip. The Finite Element Analysis shows no considerable
deformation of the hemi-spherical dome in case of using
Poly PT Flex rubber when applying stress to the sensing
sleeve. This was conﬁrmed during experimental elongation
and bending tests as well. The calibration of the sensor
results in a linear behaviour within a force range for the
two different kind of tested materials. However, the sensing
dome of Poly PT Flex rubber shows a higher force range and
less hysteresis. In the current design, materials have only be
used that have no effect on the homogeneity of MR images
which makes this device MR-compatible.
Future work will expand the potential of this new stretchable
sensor and investigate different types of silicone to identify
wider force ranges and allow even more elongation of the
manipulator. Another focus will be the inﬂuence of the tactile
sensor sleeve on changes to the manipulator’s kinematics.
Further miniaturisation is needed in order to use the sensing
sleeve for RMIS.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The work described in this paper is supported by STIFF-
FLOP project grant from the European Communities Seventh
Framework Programme under grant agreement 287728. The
research was also partially funded/supported by the National
Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research
Centre based at Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation
Trust and King’s College London. The views expressed are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS,
the NIHR or the Department of Health.
Fig. 9. Tactile sensor sleeve behaviour during manipulator elongation and
bending
1458
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 10. Stress analysis for tactile sensors with (a) (b) Ecoﬂex Supersoft
silicone and (c) (b) Poly PT Flex rubber hemi-spherical dome
REFERENCES
[1] G. Dogangil, B. Davies, and F. R. y Baena, “A review of medical
robotics for minimally invasive soft tissue surgery,” Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers Part H: Journal of Engineering
in Medicine, vol. 224, pp. 653–679, 2010.
[2] K. Sangpradit, H. Liu, L. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Tissue
identiﬁcation using inverse ﬁnite element analysis of rolling indenta-
tion,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pp. 1250–1255, 2009.
[3] H. Wurdemann, A. Jiang, T. Nanayakkara, L. Seneviratne, and
K.Althoefer, “Variable stiffness controllable and learnable manipu-
lator for mis,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation Workshop: Modular Surgical Robotics: how can we make
it possible?, 2012.
[4] M. Li, H. Liu, J. Li, L. D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, “Tissue
stiffness simulation and abnormality localization using pseudo-haptic
feedback,” inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutoma-
tion, pp. 5359–5364, 2012.
[5] S. Sareh, J. Rossiter, A. Conn, K. Drescher, and R. Goldstein,
“Swimming like algae: biomimetic soft artiﬁcial cilia,” Journal of the
Royal Society Interface, vol. 10, no. 78, 2012.
[6] S. Junker, “Ultrastructure of tactile papillae on tendrils of eccremo-
carpus scaber r. et p.,” New Phytol., vol. 78, pp. 607–610, 1977.
[7] D. Trivedi, C. Rahn, W. Kierb, and I. Walker, “Soft robotics: Biological
inspiration, state of the art, and future research,” Applied Bionics and
Biomechanics, vol. 5, no. 3, p. 99117, 2008.
[8] S. Sanan, M. Ornstein, and C. Atkeson, “Physical human interaction
for an inﬂatable manipulator,” in Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, 2011.
[9] J. Shang, D. Noonan, C. Payne, J. Clark, M. Sodergren, A. Darzi, and
G.-Z. Yang, “An articulated universal joint based ﬂexible access robot
for minimally invasive surgery,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, pp. 1147–1152, 2011.
[10] C.Laschi, M. Cianchetti, B. Mazzolai, L. Margheri, M. Follador, and
P. Dario, “Soft robot arm inspired by the octopus,”AdvancedRobotics,
vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 709–727, 2012.
[11] M. Cianchetti, T. Ranzani, Member, G. Gerboni, I. de Falco, C. Laschi,
and A. Menciassi, “STIFF-FLOP surgical manipulator: mechanical
design and experimental characterization of the single module,” in
IEEE Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013.
[12] G. Ganesh, N. Jarrasse, S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaefer, and E. Burdet,
“A versatile biomimetic controller for contact tooling and haptic
exploration,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp. 3329–3334, 2012.
[13] S. Haddadin, A. Albu-Schaefer, A. de Luca, and G. Hirzinger, “Col-
lision detection and reaction: A contribution to safe physical human-
robot interaction,” inIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
Robots and Systems, pp. 3356–3363, 2011.
[14] D. Kraft, A. Bierbaum, M. Kjaergaard, J. Ratkevicius, A. Kjaer-
Nielsen, and C. Ryberg, “Tactile object exploration using cursor
navigation sensors,” in EuroHaptics Symposium on haptic interfaces
for virtual environment and teleoperator systems, p. 296301, 2009.
[15] A. Okamura and M. Cutkosky, “Feature detection for haptic explo-
ration with robotic ﬁngers,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 20, pp. 925–938, 2001.
[16] A. Okamura, Haptic exploration of unknown objects. PhD thesis,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, 2000.
[17] Z. Pezzementi, E. Plaku, C. Reyda, and G. Hager, “Tactile-object
recognition from appearance information,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 27, no. 3, p. 473487, 2011.
[18] S. Chitta, J. Sturm, M. Piccoli, and W. Burgard, “Tactile sensing for
mobile manipulation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 27, no. 99,
p. 111, 2011.
[19] P. Puangmali, K. Althoefer, L. Seneviratne, D. Murphy, and P. Das-
gupta, “State-of-the-art in force and tactile sensing for minimally
invasive surgery,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, 2008.
[20] J. Wang, H. Sato, C. Xu, and M. Taya, “Bioinspired design of tactile
sensors based on ﬂemion,” J. Appl. Phys., vol. 105, 2009.
[21] A. Jain, M. Killpack, A. Edsinger, and C. Kemp, “Reaching in clutter
with whole-arm tactile sensing,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2013.
[22] T. Hoshi and H. Shinoda, “A sensitive skin based on touch-area-
evaluating tactile elements,” in Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for
Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems, 2006.
[23] R. Tajima, S. Kagami, M. Inaba, and H. Inoue, “Development of
soft and distributed tactile sensors and the application to a humanoid
robot,” Advanced Robotics, vol. 16, no. 4, p. 381397, 2002.
[24] Y . Tada, M. Inoue, T. Kawasaki, Y . Kawahito, H. Ishiguro, and
K. Suganuma, “A ﬂexible and stretchable tactile sensor utilizing
static electricity,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, 2007.
[25] A. Nagakubo, H. Alirezaei, and Y . Kuniyoshi, “A deformable and
deformation sensitive tactile distribution sensor,” inIEEEInternational
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2007.
[26] D. Cotton, I. Graz, and S. Lacour, “A multifunctional capacitive sensor
for stretchable electronic skins,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 9, no. 12,
2009.
[27] L. Ventrelli, L. Beccai, V . Mattoli, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario,
“Development of a stretchable skin-like tactile sensor based on poly-
meric composites,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Biomimetics, 2009.
[28] C. Majidi, R. Kramer, and R. Wood, “A non-differential elastomer
curvature sensor for softer-than-skin electronics,” Smart Mater. Struct.,
vol. 20, p. 105017, 2011.
[29] D. Tawil, D. Rye, and M. Velonaki, “Improved image reconstruction
for an eit-based sensitive skin with multiple internal electrodes,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425 – 435, 2011.
[30] P. Polygerinos, P. Puangmali, T. Schaeffter, R. Razavi, L. Seneviratne,
and K. Althoefer, “Novel miniature mri-compatible ﬁber-optic force
sensor for cardiac catheterization procedures,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 2598–2603, 2010.
[31] P. Puangmali, H. Liu, L. Seneviratne, P. Dasgupta, and K. Althoefer,
“Miniature 3-axis distal force sensor for minimally invasive surgical
palpation,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 646–656, 2012.
[32] H. Xie, A. Jiang, H. Wurdemann, H. Liu, L. Seneviratne, and K. Al-
thoefer, “Magnetic resonance-compatible tactile force sensor using
ﬁber optics and vision sensor,” IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 829–838, 2013.
[33] A. Ataollahi, P. Polygerinos, P. Puangmali, L. Seneviratne, and K. Al-
thoefer, “Tactile sensor array using prismatic-tip optical ﬁbers for
dexterous robotic hands,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 910,915, 2010.
1459
