  
? 
Abstract—Few of the current injection technologies can be 
applied to those human cells whose diameters are ranged 
about 10 ? 25 ?m only. This paper reports our most recent 
effort in developing a robot-aided microinjection system to 
solve the challenging problem of automated injection on 
human cells. A unique microfluidic cell holding chip is 
designed and fabricated to trap the single cells in the 
predefined docking area. Imaging processing technique is 
used to recognize automatically the target cells to be injected. 
A microrobot system equipped with a micropipette is used to 
perform the injection tasks on these target cells. Injection 
experiments on human embryonic stem cells (hESCs) (ranged 
about 17 ? 25?m) are performed to demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the proposed microinjection system. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Study of specific cellular responses by transferring foreign 
intracellular factors into cells is a common biological practice. 
Delivery of intracellular factors such as DNA or RNA can be 
achieved biologically [1] (viral vector), chemically [2 ? 3] 
(liposome), physically [4 ? 6] (electric or laser pulse) and 
mechanically [7] (gene gun or microinjection). Among these 
methods, the biological and chemical method is notably 
performed based on mass production, with the efficiency that 
highly depends on different cell types. This method has 
difficulty to be used in some biological studies that require 
single cell analysis. The physical method utilizes electric or 
laser pulses to open a hole on cell membrane, allowing foreign 
facts to pass through the cell membrane. This method can be 
applied to single cell study but subject to passive diffusion of 
foreign factors, which may affect the delivery efficiency. The 
mechanical method, e.g., microinjection, employs a glass 
micropipette to penetrate through the cell membrane using a 
mechanical force and deliver liquid substance into cell. This 
method can guarantee direct transfer of foreign intracellular 
factors into a specific region inside the cell.  
Microinjection has exhibited many applications in various 
areas such as in vitro fertilization, sperm injection and drug 
development. Currently, the majority of microinjection tasks 
are manually performed by skilled operators, supported by 
microscope. However, manual injections have much difficulty 
 
* This work was supported by a grant from the Theme-based Research 
Scheme (T13-706), and a grant from Research Grants Council of the Hong 
Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Reference No. CityU 121513). 
1
Department of Mechanical and Biomedical Engineering, City University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China (e-mail: yutchow2@gapps.cityu.edu.hk, 
shuxuchen2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk and medsun@cityu.edu.hk).  
2
Department of Biology and Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong, China (e-mail: bhcheng@cityu.edu.hk).  
3
Stem Cell & Regenerative Medicine Consortium, and Departments of 
Medicine and Physiology, LKS Faculty of Medicine, University of Hong 
Kong, Hong Kong. (email: lironald@me.com) 
 
to succeed the injection tasks for those cells whose sizes are 
less than 25?m (e.g., human somatic cells). As the rapid 
development of biomedical research in recent years, there is a 
great demand to develop a new robot-aided technology that 
not only can eliminate human involvement to large extent for 
improving the microinjection efficiency but also can achieve 
microinjection on human cells whose diameters are usually 
ranged from 10?m to 25?m. 
A typical microinjection system consists of three main 
parts, namely microscope, microinjector and micropipette, all 
working on a cell holder. With the advance of computer vision 
and automation technology, autonomous solution has been 
proposed to perform automated microinjection on large-scale 
biological samples (50?m-500?m). Sun et. al. developed an 
autonomous 3-DOF microrobot system to accomplish a cell 
injection task on mouse embryo (~55?m) [8]. Wang et. al. 
presented a vacuum-based embryo holding device in a fully 
automated robotic system for microinjection of Zebrafish 
Embryos (~500?m) [9]. Huang et. al. developed a robotic 
system with a combined position and force control to achieve 
automated batch injection of suspended embryo cells [10,11]. 
Liu et. al. developed an automated robotic microinjection 
system for delivering cell impermeable compounds into 
mouse zygotes (~100?m) [12]. Although significant efforts 
have been made to automate microinjection using robotic 
device in the past [13 ? 17], an automated system for batch 
injection of human cells with much smaller size (<25 ?m) has 
not been demonstrated yet.  
 To achieve microinjection on small single cells, it is 
necessary to integrate the microfluidic chip technology into 
the microinjection system [18]. Development of microfluidic 
chip technology has attracted considerable attentions in cell 
engineering study [19 ? 22]. Microfluidic chip technology has 
provided a new way for single cell handing and analysis [24], 
such as cell-to-cell interaction [24], cell sorting [25] and cell 
fusion [26]. Micro and nano-scale engineering approaches 
have been developed to enhance our understanding of cell 
behavior in a fast and precise manner [27]. These approaches 
lay a solid base for the development of a new microfluidic cell 
holding chip for the microinjection system.  
This paper reports our recent development of a 
vision-based automated cell injection system for single human 
cells whose diameters are smaller than 25 ?m. A uniquely 
designed microfluidic chip was fabricated and used as a 
vacuum-based cell holder to locate single cells in predefined 
locations. Imaging processing was applied to recognize the 
target cells precisely. A microinjection system with a 
micropipette, controlled by a closed-loop motion controller, 
was employed to perform injection process. This cell injection 
system exhibits the following advantages.  First, it is able to 
accomplish high volume microinjection with high accuracy, 
as supported by a uniquely designed cell holder structure that  
Development of a High Throughput Robot-aided Cell Injection 
System for Human Cells* 
Yu Ting Chow
1
, Shuxun Chen
1
, Chong Liu
1
, Shuk Han Cheng
2
, Ronald A. Li
3
, and Dong Sun
1
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 963
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  a) Cell injection system setup. 1) CCD camera, 2)Z-Linear table, 3) Injection chamber, 4) UV Lamp, 5) XY-micropositioning stage, 6) 
microinjector, 7) Computer and 3-axis controller. b) Close-up of the setup. 8) microscope, 9) Micropipette, 10) Petri dish and 11) Cell holder. 
Figure 2.  The schematic diagram of cell injection system setup. 
can dock the target cells in a traceable manner. Second, the 
cell to be injected can be as small as 10 ?m, hence making the 
injection system applicable to human cells. Third, the cell 
holder chip can be integrated with other microfluidic chips, 
which allows further operations without removing the injected 
cells from the microfluidic platform. 
II. SYSTEM DESIGN 
In view of the tiny size of human cells, the automated 
microinjection system to be developed must be able to 
perform high accuracy and high speed batch injection with 
submicron resolution. In this section, we will introduce our 
developed new system setup, which included a cell injection 
system with a cell holding chip for trapping cells in the desired 
location, a cell recognition system using edge-based template 
matching algorithm, and a precise motion control system.  
A. Injection System Setup 
Fig. 1 illustrates the developed setup of the automated 
robot-aided cell injection system, and Fig. 2 illustrates a 
diagram of the setup. The whole system consists of three 
modules: a computer vision module, a motorized stage control 
module and an executive module. 
The computer vision module contains a vision system that 
includes an optical microscope, a lighting system, a CCD 
camera and an image grabber. The microscope is composed by 
a 20X objective (Mitutoyo, Japan) and an observation tube 
(Infinity Tube, USA). The lighting source is provided by an  
Figure 3.  Flow direction when negative pressure is applied. Cell 
docking zone located at the edges of the chip. 
Figure 4.  The schematic of the cell holder design. a) 5?m layer. b) 
10?m layer. c) The overall view of the design. 
illuminator (PL-800, Fiber-Lite). A CCD camera (STC-700, 
SENTECH) is mounted on the other end of the observation 
tube instead of eyepiece. The image is captured through a 
PC2-Vision frame grabber (OC-PC2M-VUM00, DASAL
964
  
 
 
Figure 5.  Simulation results. a) Velocity distribution surface. b) Velocity distribution curve along line 1 to 5. Enlarged view for observing line 4 and 5 (Top left 
corner). 
Corp.) and processed by a windows based image processing 
library named Saparal
TM
 Essential. 
The motorized stage control module contains a X-Y micro 
position stage (PI M-L01, Physik Instrumente Co., Ltd) and a 
Z-axis linear table (KR30H06A, THK CO., LTD), driven by a 
3-axis motion controller (DCT0040, Dynacity Tech. Ltd). All 
the X, Y, Z axes have resolutions of 1?m. 
The executive module is composed of a micropipette, a 
microfluidic cell holder, and a pressure based microinjector 
(IM-300, NARISHIGE).  The micropipette is mounted on the 
Z-axis linear table, and the microfluidic cell holder is placed 
on the X-Y stage. The microinjector is connected to the  
micropipette through a tube, providing a positive pressure to 
deliver liquid substance. The microinjector is also connected 
to the microfluidic cell holder, providing a negative pressure 
to immobilize suspending cells. 
B. Microfluidic Device 
To achieve high throughput cell injection, a microfluidic 
cell holding chip is designed to trap cells at the predefined 
positions. The cell holding chip comprises of 256 
polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) cell arrays at the end of 
bisection-tree-like channel. The chip is composed of two 
layers of structure, 5?m thick channel supporting layer (Fig. 
3a), and 10?m thick cell docking layer (Fig. 3b). The width of 
the trapping channel is 15?m. A schematic showing how cell 
is trapped is given in Fig. 4. The trapping force is generated by 
driving fluid flow from the cell docking zone to the outlet. In 
order to generate the suction force, a negative pressure was 
applied to the outlet, so as to create current flow towards the 
cell docking zone. Then, cells will experience a fluid drag 
force by the flowing culture medium. Eventually, the cell will 
be located regularly in the docking area. The 
channel-supporting layer only allows fluid to flow thorough, 
but the cells with a diameter larger than 5?m cannot pass. By 
using this holding chip, cells can be trapped and located easily 
in the cell holder. 
Fabrication of the microfluidic holding chip utilizes the 
soft lithography technology. The PDMS channel can be 
obtained through the molding of reverse structure of the 
master. To fabricate the master, a 3-inch silicon wafer was 
spin-coated with 5?m thick SU-8 photoresist (GM1050, 
Gersteltec Sarl). Then the coated wafer was prebake on a 
hotplate (AccuPlate, Labnet) at 95
0
C rising from room 
temperature for 3 minutes. After heating, the wafer was 
exposed to UV light with the mask of the channel-supporting 
layer on surface. The exposed wafer was baked at 80
0
C for 2 
minutes for crosslinking the exposed SU-8. The exposed area 
was developed by immersing in SU8 developer (DRGM, 
Gersteltec Sarl). The fabrication of the 10?m thick 
cell-docking layer was the same as that for the first layer. The 
mask of cell docking layer was precisely aligned on the 
channel-supporting layer using an aligner.  
To fabricate the microfluidic chip, PDMS, mixing with 
curing agent with 1:10 ratio, was poured on the master mold 
and degassed in a vacuum desiccator.  Then, it was heated in 
an oven with 80
0
C for 2 hours. The cured PDMS was peeled 
off from the mold and was cut on a micromanipulation table.  
Figure 6.  The cell holder images before and after filtering. a) Raw image.  b) Processed image. 
965
  
 
 
 
Process step Image Process Techniques Used 
1 Gaussian Filter 
2 Median Filter 
3 Sobel Edge detector 
4 Closing 
5 Thining 
6 Edge Template Matching 
 
TABLE I.  IMAGE PROCESS FLOW FOR RECOGNITIZING CELL 
Figure 7.  Cell traps recognition using the edge template matching 
algorithm. a) The template image.  b) Cell trap position after 
recognition. 
The cutting process was conducted under a microscope 
with 5X objective. The surface of the processed PDMS and a 
clean cover slide were then plasma activated and bonded 
together to form irreversible seal. 
Simulation was conducted using Comsol Multiphysics finite 
element software to determine whether the suction force on 
each trap was uniform. MEMS module with incompressible 
Navier-Stoke was used to simulate the flow behavior of the 
designed cell holder. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 
5. As shown in Fig. 5(a), the velocity distribution on the whole 
cell holder was uniform. The velocity distribution along 5 
lines in Fig. 5(a) is plotted in Fig. 5b. It is seen that the flow 
velocity for each channel was the same. This confirmed that 
the bisection-tree-like channel network was able to achieve 
uniform suction force, when negative pressure was applied to 
outlet. 
III. AUTOMATED CELL INJECTION 
Automated cell injection can be divided into two main 
processes: image processing technique used for target cell  
A. Image Processing 
After cells were trapped in cell docking area of microfluidic 
chip, the images were captured by scanning across the docking 
area with the programmed X-Y micropositioning stage. A 
sequence of spatial filter was used to eliminate the noise. A 
low-pass Gaussian filter and median were applied to the 
captured image to remove the high frequency noise and pepper 
noise respectively. The edge information of each channel was 
extracted by Sobel operation and a binary image was obtained. 
Small discontinuities were connected on the binary image and 
the boundary of the image was acquired by applying thinning  
Figure 8.  Flow diagram of automated cell injection. 
Figure 9.  The visual base position control architecture of the 
microinjection system. 
operation. Fig. 6 illustrates images before and after processing. 
The procedures used for image processing operation are given 
in Table 1.  
The edge template matching algorithm was used to locate 
the cell docking position. First, a typical single cell trap 
element inside the cell holder was manually selected.  The 
template image was then processed by following the 
procedures as listed in Table 1. When the correlation between 
the input image and the template was larger than 70%, the 
center of the matched pattern was recognized as the cell 
docking position. Fig. 7 (a) illustrates a template image, and 
Fig. 7(b) illustrates the result of the cell docking position 
recognized by using the template image. Fig. 7(b) illustrates 
the result of the cell docking position recognized by using the 
template image. All the cell traps are located in Fig. 7(b). This 
shows detection can be stable even with high background 
noise.  
966
  
 
 
 
B. Automatic Cell Injection 
Before injection, the tip position of the micropipette and 
the image of the edge template were input to the system first. 
The origin of the image plane was set at the tip position of the 
micropipette. After the cell docking position was recognized, 
the cell trajectories in X and Y axes were generated, based on 
the relative position between the micropipette tip position and 
the cell docking position. Then, the following steps were 
implemented. First, the position of the cells is determined by 
template matching algorithm. Then, the micropipette was 
aligned with the first cell on the left hand side in X-axis. The 
cell was moved in Y-axis according to the calculated 
trajectory. The microinjector injected the material into the 
micropipette, with preset injection pressure and time. After 
the injection was completed, the cell holder moved away 
from the tip of the micropipette and back to the previous 
position. Template matching is executed again to determine 
the next target cell location. The flow diagram of such an 
automated cell injection process is shown in Fig. 8. All 
motions of X-Y positioning stage were controlled by a motion 
controller, utilizing the feedback from the motor encoders and 
the CCD camera captured image. Fig. 9 shows the visual 
based position control architecture. 
IV. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
Experiments of microinjection on hESCs were performed 
to evaluate the performance of the proposed robot-aided 
microinjection system.  Microinjection of intracellular factors 
into hESCs can be used for facilitating the investigation on 
cell differentiation.  
The hESC culture method was previously described in 
detail [25]. Prior to the experiments, the microfluidic cell 
holding chip was filled with 70% ethanol and exposed under 
UV for 30 min for sterilization. Then the chip was washed 
twice with the cell culture medium. Air bubbles were 
removed from bisection-tree-like channel by placing the chip 
in a vacuum desiccator. The chip was finally fixed in a 35 mm 
petri dish, which was placed on the X-Y micropositioning 
stage. The microinjector was connected to the outlet of the 
chip through polyethylene tubing.  The human cells were 
obtained with 0.05% trypsin–EDTA treatment and suspended 
in culture medium.  
At the beginning of experiment, the micropipette which 
loaded with liquid substance was first inserted into the 15?m 
gap between PDMS and bonded cover glass slip by 
controlling the Z-aixs linear table and X-Y stage manually. 
The petri dish was filled with cell culture medium until the 
cell holding chip was fully immersed. Then 20?l hESCs 
(~1000 cells/?l) were placed into petri dish and trapped at cell 
docking area of the cell holding chip, under the control of 
negative pressure applied by microinjector. This process 
takes about a few minutes. The residue cells were removed by 
pipette to carefully suck away medium. Figure 10 shows the 
result of cell trapping by the microfluidic chip.  
Figure 11 illustrates the automated microinjection process. 
After imaging processing, the target cell was aligned with the 
micropipette in X-axis as shown in Fig. 11a. Then the target 
cell was driven towards micropipette tip in Y-axis. The 
microinjector applied a positive pressure to the micropipette  
Figure 10.  Experimental results. The cells are able to be 
trapped in the cell holder. 
Figure 11.  Automated cell injection procedures. a) Target cell was 
aligned with micropipette tip in X-axis. b) Cell was injected. c) 
Injected cell was pulled back. d) New cell was aligned with 
micropipette tip. 
Figure 12.  Motion performance of the X-Y stage during cell injection. a) 
Actual position in X-axis. b) Position error in X-axis. c) Actual 
Position in Y-axis. d) Position error in Y-axis. 
and injected liquid substance into cells, as shown in Fig. 11b.  
After injection, the cell moved back with the X-Y position 
stage and the next target cell was aligned with the 
micropipette tip in X-axis, as shown in Fig 11c and Fig. 11d.  
The above procedures were repeated until all the cells were 
injected. Figure 12 illustrates the motion trajectories in X-axis 
967
  
and Y-axis, demonstrating that the position control algorithm 
exhibited satisfactory tracking performance for such 
micromanipulation. 
In the experiment, the average time for the automated cell 
injection process, including moving the cell holder toward the 
micropipette, performing injection, moving the cell holder 
away from the micropipette and switching to the next target 
cell (one cycle), was about 2 seconds in total. Thus, the 
average throughput was 30 cells per minute. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a robot-aided automated microinjection 
system for human cells with much smaller size (10 – 25?m) 
compared to embryos (>50?m) was developed. The 
developed cell injection system was able to perform 
automated batch cell injection with the help of microfluidic 
chip and image processing techniques. A microfluidic cell 
holding chip was particularly designed and fabricated to hold 
the target cells at the predefined cell docking positions, which 
were then located by image processing technique. The target 
cells were injected under manipulation of a microrobotic 
injector, which adopted a visual based position control 
algorithm. Microinjection experiments on hESCs were 
performed to demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed 
approach. The proposed technology can largely improve both 
efficiency and capability of the current cell injection industry. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors wish to thank Dr. Chi-wing Kong from the 
Stem Cell and Regenerative Medicine Consortium at the 
University of Hong Kong for providing the hESCs, as well as 
for his invaluable assistance with cell culture. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. D. Robbins and S. C. Ghivizzani, “Viral Vectors for Gene 
Therapy,” Pharmacology & Therapeutics, vol. 80, no. 1, pp. 35 – 47, 
1998.  
[2] F. Graham and A. Van der Eb, “Transformation of rat cells by DNA 
of human adenovirus 5,” Virology, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 536–539, 1973. 
[3] T. Alexakis, D. Boadi, D. Quong, A. Groboillot, I. O’neill, 
D. Poncelet, and R. Neufeld, “Microencapsulation of DNA within 
alginate microspheres and crosslinked chitosan membranes for in 
vivo application,” Applied biochemistry and biotechnology, vol. 50, 
no. 1, pp. 93–106, 1995. 
[4] M. Costa, M. Dottori, K. Sourris, P. Jamshidi, T. Hatzistavrou, 
R. Davis, L. Azzola, S. Jackson, S. M. Lim, M. Pera et al., “A 
method for genetic modification of human embryonic stem cells 
using electroporation,” Nature protocols, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 792–796, 
2007. 
[5] I. B. Clark, E. G. Hanania, J. Stevens, M. Gallina, A. Fieck, 
R. Brandes, B. O. Palsson, and M. R. Koller, “Optoinjection for 
efficient targeted delivery of a broad range of compounds and 
macromolecules into diverse cell types,” Journal of biomedical optics, 
vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 014034–014034, 2006. 
[6] D. J. Stevenson, F. J. Gunn-Moore, P. Campbell, and K. Dholakia, 
“Single cell optical transfection,” Journal of the Royal Society 
Interface, vol. 7, no. 47, pp. 863–871, 2010. 
[7] Y. Zhang, “Microinjection technique and protocol to single cells,” 
Protocol Exchange, Nov 2007.  
[8] Y. Sun and B. J. Nelson, “Biological cell injection using an 
autonomous microrobotic system,” The International Journal of 
Robotics Research, vol. 21, no. 10-11, pp. 861–868, 2002. 
[9] W. Wang, X. Liu, D. Gelinas, B. Ciruna, and Y. Sun, "A fully 
automated robotic system for microinjection of zebrafish embryos," 
PLoS One, vol. 2, 2007. 
[10] H. B. Huang, D. Sun, J. K. Mills, and S. H. Cheng, “Robotic cell 
injection system with position and force control: toward automatic 
batch biomanipulation,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 25, 
no. 3, pp. 727–737, 2009. 
[11] H. B. Huang, D. Sun, J. K. Mills, W. J. Li, and S.H. Cheng, 
"Visual-Based Impedance Control of Out-of-Plane Cell Injection 
Systems," Automation Science and Engineering, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 6, pp. 565-571, 2009. 
[12] X. Liu and Y. Sun, "Microfabricated glass devices for rapid single 
cell immobilization in mouse zygote microinjection," Biomedical 
Microdevices, vol. 11, pp. 1169-1174, 2009. 
[13] Y. Xie, D. Sun, C. Liu, H. Y. Tse, and S. H. Cheng, "A Force Control 
Approach to a Robot-assisted Cell Microinjection System," The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, November 13, 2009 
2009. 
[14] Y. Xie, D. Sun, C. Liu, H. Y. Tse, and S. H. Cheng, "Force sensing 
and manipulation strategy in robot-assisted microinjection on 
zebrafish embryos," IEEE/ASME Trans. on Mechatronics, vol. 16, no. 
6, pp. 1002-1010, December 2011 
[15] K. Sakaki, N. Dechev, R. D. Burke, E. J. Park, “Development of an 
autonomous biological cell manipulator with single-cell 
electroporation and visual servoing capabilities,” IEEE Trans. 
Biomed. Engineering, 56(8): 2064-2074 (2009) 
[16] Z. Lu, C. Y. Chen, J. Nam, R. Ge, and W. Lin, “A micromanipulation 
system with dynamic force-feedback for automatic batch 
microinjection,” J. of Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol 17, 
no. 2, pp. 314, 2007. 
[17] U-Xuan Tan, Win Tun Latt, Cheng Yap Shee, and Wei Tech Ang. A 
low-cost flexure-based handheld mechanism for micromanipulation. 
Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on, 16(4):773–778, 2011. 
[18] A. Adamo and K. F. Jensen, “Microfluidic based single cell 
microinjection,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 1258–1261, 2008. 
[19] H. Lee, Y. Liu, D. Ham, and R. M. Westervelt, “Integrated cell 
manipulation system-CMOS/microfluidic hybrid,” Lab on a Chip, 
vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 331–337, 2007. 
[20] S. Kobel, A. Valero, J. Latt, P. Renaud, and M. Lutolf, “Optimization 
of microfluidic single cell trapping for long-term on-chip culture,” 
Lab on a Chip, vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 857–863, 2010. 
[21] A. M. Skelley, O. Kirak, H. Suh, R. Jaenisch, and J. Voldman, 
“Microfluidic control of cell pairing and fusion,” Nature methods, 
vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 147–152, 2009. 
[22] D. Di Carlo, N. Aghdam, and L. P. Lee, “Single-cell enzyme 
concentrations, kinetics, and inhibition analysis using high-density 
hydrodynamic cell isolation arrays,” Analytical chemistry, vol. 78, 
no. 14, pp. 4925–4930, 2006. 
[23] M. Gel, S. Suzuki, Y. Kimura, O. Kurosawa, B. Techaumnat, H. 
Oana, and M. Washizu, "Microorifice-Based High-Yield Cell Fusion 
on Microfluidic Chip: Electrofusion of Selected Pairs and Fusant 
Viability," NanoBioscience, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 8, pp. 
300-305, 2009. 
[24] X. Gou, H. Han, S. Hu, A.Y.H. Leung, and D. Sun, “Applying 
combined optical tweezers and fluorescence microscopy technologies 
to manipulate cell adhesions for cell-to-cell interaction study,” IEEE 
Trans. on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2308-2315, 
August 2013. 
[25]  X. Wang, S. Chen, M. Kong, Z. Wang, K. D. Costa, R. A. Li, and D. 
Sun, “Enhanced cell sorting and manipulation with combined optical 
tweezer and microfluidic chip technologies,” Lab on a Chip, 
2011,11(21): 3656-3662. 
[26] X. Wang, X. Gou, S. Chen, X. Yan, and D. Sun, “Cell manipulation 
tool with combined microwell array and optical tweezers for cell 
isolation and deposition,” Journal of Micromechanics and 
Microengineering, 2013, 23(7): 075006. 
[27] E. Ghafar-Zadeh, J. R. Waldeisen, and L. P. Lee, "Engineered 
approaches to the stem cell microenvironment for cardiac tissue 
regeneration," Lab on a  Chip, vol. 11, pp. 3031-3048, 2011. 
968
