  
? 
Abstract— A multifunctional myoelectric prosthetic hand is a 
perfect gift for an upper-limb amputee, however, the 
myoelectric control for a prosthetic hand is not so good now. 
Here, the paper presents a comparative study on 
electromyography (EMG) pattern recognition based on PCA 
and LDA for an anthropomorphic robotic hand. Four channels 
of surface EMG (sEMG) signals were recorded from the 
subject’s forearm. Time-domain analysis, frequency-domain 
analysis, wavelet transform analysis, nonlinear entropy analysis 
and fractal analysis were done and fourteen kinds of features 
were extracted from sEMG signals. The features were divided 
into four groups, and the performances of the four groups were 
compared and analyzed. In the feature projection stage, three 
schemes were proposed and their performances were compared 
with each other. The first one only used the principal component 
analysis (PCA) for dimension reduction. And the second one 
only used the linear discriminant analysis (LDA) for dimension 
reduction. The third one used PCA for the first step of 
dimensionality reduction, and then used LDA for the next step 
of dimensionality reduction. In the classification stage, 
minimum distance classifier (MDC) was employed for 
identifying nine kinds of hand/wrist motions in the projected 
space. Comparative experiments of four groups of features and 
three projection schemes were done and evaluated. The online 
experiment of real-time myoelectric control for an 
anthropomorphic robotic hand was done as well. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, many disabled people who have lost limbs in 
wars, car accidents, and industrial accidents are provided with 
prosthetic devices to face challenges in their daily life. 
Advanced commercial prosthetic hand such as Otto Bock 
hand [1], i-Limb hand [2], and Smart hand [3] have been able 
to achieve some motions like human hands. And these devices 
could help amputee persons improve the quality of life at 
physical and psychological aspects. The approach using 
electromyography (EMG) signals from amputee persons’ 
remnant muscles to control prosthetic devices is beneficial to 
restore the missing functionality of amputated limbs, and it 
has a history of about 40 years [4]-[6]. Previous commercial 
EMG-based prosthetic devices primarily adopt a conventional 
threshold or proportional control strategy to achieve a few 
simple actions such as hand opening and closing [7]. In recent 
 
*This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of 
China under Grant 61273355, 61273356 and the Independent Subject of 
State Key Laboratory of Robotics under Grant 2013-Z06. 
Daohui Zhang is with the State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang 
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 110016, Shenyang, 
China; with the Graduate School, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100039, 
Beijing, China (e-mail: zhangdaohui@sia.cn). 
Xingang Zhao, Jianda Han and Yiwen Zhao are with the State Key 
Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, 110016, Shenyang, China (e-mail: 
zhaoxingang@sia.cn, jdhan@sia.cn, zhaoyw@sia.cn). 
years, myoelectric pattern recognition for a prosthesis system 
has attracted increasing attention [8]. 
In an EMG pattern recognition system, feature extraction 
is the process that converts original sEMG signals to a 
compact and informative set of features [9]. So far, many 
feature analyzing methods have been applied to EMG pattern 
recognition problems. L. Hargrove et al. [10] indicated that the 
combination of the time-domain features and the 
autoregressive (AR) features had outstanding performance in 
EMG pattern recognition. In [11], discrete wavelet transform 
was compared with the combination of integral of sEMG 
(IEMG) and power spectral density (PSD) for six simple hand 
motions. In the previous work [12], we extracted five 
time-domain features including the mean absolute value 
(MAV), root mean square (RMS), zero crossings (ZC), 
Waveform length (WL) and slope sign changes (SSC) and 
four frequency-domain features including the power spectral 
density (PSD), median frequency (FMN), median frequency 
(FMD) and auto-regressive coefficients (AR).  
Traditional methods such as time-domain and 
frequency-domain analyzing methods have been widely 
utilized in EMG pattern recognition, and they have a good 
capability to track muscular changes. However, these methods 
are not effective in detecting the critical feature of sEMG 
signals during transient human movements. A sEMG signal 
which is a complex signal embedded in noise is non-stationary 
and stems from a high-dimensional nonlinear system. 
Therefore, nonlinear methods such as nonlinear entropy 
analysis and fractal analysis recently have been proposed to 
analyze sEMG signals for extracting some informative 
features which can detect the changes in different muscle 
statuses. Zhao Jingdong et al. [13] extracted sample entropy 
and wavelet transform coefficients from three channels of 
sEMG signals for classifying six fingers movements. The 
fractal dimension features were utilized for identifying finger 
movements in [14]. Actually, nonlinear features can only be 
seen in a few literatures owing to their high complexity. 
Researchers commonly just focus on one or two kinds of 
nonlinear features and illustrate the experimental results in 
EMG pattern recognition. This study will do nonlinear entropy 
analysis and fractal analysis and extract four representative 
features. The traditional methods including time-domain 
analysis, frequency-domain analysis and wavelet transform 
analysis will be utilized as well, and ten frequently-used 
features will be extracted. The total fourteen features from five 
analyzing methods will be divided into four groups, and the 
recognition performances of the four groups of features will be 
studied comparatively. 
In order to recognize more motion patterns, more channels 
of sEMG signals and more kinds of features are used to 
increase the information extracted from sEMG signals. This 
A Comparative Study on PCA and LDA Based EMG Pattern 
Recognition for Anthropomorphic Robotic Hand* 
Daohui Zhang, Xingang Zhao, Jianda Han, and Yiwen Zhao 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4850
  
leads to a high dimensionality of the feature vector. Thus, 
feature projection is needed in EMG pattern recognition. 
Feature projection could map high dimensional original 
features to an appropriate low dimensional space. And feature 
projection could be optimized by a learning criterion so that 
the features belonging to the same class are clustered and the 
generalization ability is improved. In addition, dimensionality 
reduction of feature projection reduces the processing time of 
pattern recognition, and is beneficial to meet the demand of 
the real-time control. The principal component analysis (PCA) 
is a conventional method which can project high dimension 
data into a low dimension space and make the data not 
relevant in the low dimension space. The paper [13] adopted 
PCA to reduce the dimensionality of WPT coefficients from 
four channel EMG signals. In this study, PCA is used to carry 
out the first step of dimensionality reduction considering that 
PCA merely generates a well-described coordinate space of 
the features without considering class separation. The linear 
discriminant analysis (LDA) could reduce the dimensionality 
of features and meanwhile take the class separability into 
account. Plus, LDA just needs a short processing time. 
Therefore, in the study, LDA is used for the second step of 
dimensionality reduction considering that the combination of 
PCA and LDA projection may obtain a better integrated merits 
deriving from both the two methods. In the classification 
stage, the minimum distance classifier (MDC) is employed to 
recognize the projected features. 
In the previous work [12], we have used five time-domain 
features and four frequency-domain features from four 
channels of sEMG, and have compared the performance of 
LDA and PCA+LDA for classifying five kinds of hand 
motions. The goal of this study is to find an efficient feature 
projection method based on PCA and LDA for EMG pattern 
recognition and to compare and evaluate the performance of 
four groups of features derived from the five analyzing 
methods including time-domain analysis, frequency-domain 
analysis, wavelet transform analysis, nonlinear entropy 
analysis and fractal analysis, and finally to construct a most 
efficient EMG pattern recognition system for nine kinds of 
hand/wrist motions. In this study, the pattern recognition 
system consists of the feature extraction including five kinds 
of analysis methods, PCA feature projection, LDA feature 
projection and MDC classification, as shown in Fig. 1. The 
PCA+LDA projection is compared with PCA projection and 
LDA projection respectively. Finally, the real-time EMG 
pattern recognition system is implemented for an 
anthropomorphic robotic hand, and its performance is 
demonstrated. 
 
Figure 1.  Block diagram of EMG pattern recognition system. 
II. DATA ACQUISITION 
This study attempted to recognize nine kinds of hand/wrist 
motions: hand closing (HC), hand opening (HO), index finger 
pinching (IFP), middle finger pinching (MFP), wrist flexion 
(WF), wrist extension (WE), wrist radial deviation (WRD), 
wrist ulnar deviation (WUD) and relaxing motion (RM) as 
shown in Fig. 2. Four surface electrodes were used to acquire 
the sEMG signals from the extensor digitorum, flexor 
digitorum superficialus, extensor carpiradialis, and flexor 
carpiulnaris, respectively, which are concerned with the nine 
motions. In order to collect high quality sEMG signals, the 
skin was scrubbed with alcohol and shaved if necessary, and 
then the electrodes with conductive gel were attached to the 
corresponding positions as shown in Fig. 3. 
 
HC                  HO                  IFP                 MFP                 RM 
 
WF                  WE               WRD             WUD 
Figure 2.  Nine kinds of hand/wrist motions. 
 
Figure 3.  The placement of surface electrodes on a left forearm. 
Since the amplitude of sEMG signals is at range of 
100~5000uV, and the spectrum is mainly distributed in 
10~500Hz, the study adopts the MyoScan EMG Sensor (see 
Fig. 4), whose parameters are shown in Table I. The sEMG 
signals are digitized by an A/D converter card, Advantech 
PCI-1716, and each channel is sampled at a rate of 1000 Hz 
with 16-bit resolution. 
 
Figure 4.  MyoScan EMG Sensor 
TABLE I.  THE SENOR’S PARAMETERS 
Sensor’s 
Parameters 
parameters 
Power 
supply 
Amplifying 
rate 
Input 
signal 
range 
Active 
frequency 
range 
Sampling 
rate 
values 7.2V 500 0-2000uV 10-500Hz 2048s/s 
In this study, sixteen groups of sEMG signals were 
collected from one intact-limb subject’s forearm. The first 
eight groups were used for the training section, while the 
remaining eight groups were used for the test section. For each 
group, the time of data acquisition was 32 seconds, 2 seconds 
for each active motion (the nine motions except the relaxing 
motion), and a 2-second relaxing motion between each two 
active motions. There was a two minutes rest time between 
every two groups to prevent muscle fatigue. 
III. FEATURE EXTRACTION 
In order to control an robotic hand in real time without 
perceiving a time delay, the processing time of EMG pattern 
4851
  
recognition should be less than 300 msec. Thus, the scheme of 
a sliding window with an incremental window was adopted 
for the steady-state motion recognition. For the real-time 
myoelectric hand control, all the processes including 
transmitting control commands should be completed within an 
incremental window. In this study, a 128-msec (128 samples) 
sliding window with a 32-msec (32 samples) incremental 
window was selected. After data segmentation, fourteen 
features would be extracted in a sliding window. In this study, 
we would use the five analyzing methods including the 
time-domain analysis, frequency-domain analysis, wavelet 
transform analysis, nonlinear entropy analysis, and fractal 
analysis. 
Time-domain analysis is one of the simplest and most 
common feature analyzing methods. We selected six typical 
EMG features including the mean absolute value (MAV), root 
mean square (RMS), zero crossings (ZC), waveform length 
(WL), slope sign changes (SSC), and autoregressive model 
coefficients (ARC). Here, the 4-order autoregressive model 
was adopted, and the parameters a1, a2, a3, a4 were chosen as 
EMG features. 
Frequency-domain analysis is another traditional 
analyzing method for EMG recognition. Average power (AP), 
mean frequency (FMN), and median frequency (FMD) were 
used to extract the frequency spectrum information from the 
sEMG signals in the study. 
Wavelet transform analysis is one kind of 
time-frequency-domain analyzing methods, which can 
simultaneously obtain time information and frequency 
information from signals. In this study, 3-layer wavelet 
decomposition and reconstruction were implemented, and the 
mean values of coefficients d1, d2, d3, a3 were used as EMG 
features. Experimental results indicated that the mean value 
used less processing time yet obtained even higher 
identification accuracy compared to the singular value 
deriving from singular value decomposition in the study. 
Nonlinear entropy analysis is a promising approach to 
characterize non-stationary and nonlinear EMG signals. In this 
study, the nonextensive entropy (TE) and sample entropy (SE) 
were chosen to extract nonlinear information from sEMG 
signals. 
Fractal analysis is a new approach to describe the inherent 
self-similarity and long-range correlation of sEMG signals. 
Correlation dimension (D
C
) and box dimension (D
B
) are two 
representative parameters of fractal dimension, thus they were 
selected as EMG features for motion recognition in this study. 
In total, 14 kinds of features deriving from five analyzing 
methods were extracted from 4 channels of sEMG signals. 
Some of those features are shown as Fig. 5. These features 
were divided into 4 groups according to their performance and 
category (see Table II). Group A includes 6 kinds of 
time-domain features. Group B contains 3 kinds of 
frequency-domain features and wavelet transform coefficients 
(WTC). Group C consists of 2 kinds of nonlinear entropy 
features and 2 kinds of fractal dimension features. Group D is 
the combination of 3 kinds of time-domain features and 
wavelet transform coefficients (WTC). 
 
(a) Raw sEMG                                            (b) RMS 
 
(c) FMD                                             (d) WTC (a3) 
 
(e) SE                                                     (f) D C 
Figure 5.  Some features extracted from 4 channels of sEMG signals 
TABLE II.  THE FEATURE GROUPING 
Feature 
Grouping 
Groups 
Group A Group B Group C Group D 
features 
MAV, RMS, 
ZC, WL, SSC, 
ARC 
AP, FMN, 
FMD, WTC 
TE, SE, 
D C, D B 
RMS, WL, 
SSC, WTC 
IV. FEATURE PROJECTION AND CLASSIFICATION 
With the increase of the number of channels and features, 
the feature vector becomes a high-dimensional vector. In order 
to realize EMG pattern recognition efficiently, feature 
projection is necessary to map a high-dimension feature vector 
to an appropriate lower dimension space. Feature projection 
could make the feature vectors which belong to the same class 
clustered, and improve the generalization ability of the 
classifier. In addition, dimensionality reduction of feature 
projection could reduce the computational cost of EMG 
pattern recognition. In order to find the best feature projection 
scheme, the three projection schemes were compared in this 
study (see Fig. 6). The first one was just using PCA for the 
feature projection. The second one was that the principal 
component analysis (PCA) was used for the first step of 
feature projection, and then the linear discriminant analysis 
(LDA) was used for the next step of feature projection. And 
the third one was just using LDA for the feature projection. In 
this study, the three projection schemes are written as PCA, 
PCA+LDA, and LDA for short. 
 
Figure 6.  Schematic diagram of the three feature projection schemes 
4852
  
As described in the previous work [12], PCA can project 
feature vectors from a high-dimension space onto a 
low-dimension space, and make the variance of data 
maximum in the low-dimension space. Suppose that 
X=(X
1
,X
2
,…,X
n
)
T
 is an n-dimension random variable, 
Y=(Y
1
,Y
2
,…,Y
m
)
T
 is an m-dimension random variable, 
C=1/(n-1)∑ (X
i
-u)(X
i
-u)
T
 is the covariance matrix of the 
samples. Assume that there is a linear transformation: 
1 11 1 21 2 1 1
2 12 1 22 2 2 2
1 1 2 2
T
nn
T
nn
T
m m m nm n m
Y a X a X a X a X
Y a X a X a X a X
Y a X a X a X a X
? ? ? ? ? ?
?
? ? ? ? ? ?
?
?
?
? ? ? ? ?
?
                (1) 
The problem of solving Var(Y
i
) maximum value can be 
transform into solving the following optimization problem: 
11
11
m ax  
s.t  1
T
T
a C a
aa
?
?
?
?
?
?
                                  (2) 
To solve the problem the Lagrange multiplier is used, and 
the formula Ca
i
=? a
i
 is gotten. And then the principal 
components could be gotten. In general, The i-th principal 
component of X can be obtained by solving the corresponding 
eigenvector of the i-th largest eigenvalue, and they are usually 
required to be independent of each other in order to make the 
information they contains not overlapping.  
Finally, a set of orthogonal basis (a
1
, a
2
,…, a
m
), denoted by 
A, is obtained, and it can project n-dimension random 
variables X=(X
1
,X
2
,…,X
n
)
T
 for m(m<n)-dimension random 
variables Y=(Y
1
,Y
2
,…,Y
m
)
T
 by (3), achieving dimensionality 
reduction meanwhile retaining the maximum information. 
T
Y A X ?
                                   (3) 
As described in the previous work [12], LDA projects 
high-dimension vectors onto an optimal discriminant space to 
extract class information and reduce the vector dimension, and 
makes sure that the projected vectors have the largest 
between-class distance and the smallest within-class distance. 
The between-class scatter matrix and the within-class scatter 
matrix are defined as follows: 
? ?? ?
1
c
T
b i i i
i
S n u u u u
?
? ? ?
?
                    (4) 
? ?? ?
1 
k
c
T
w i k i k
i x class i
S u x u x
??
? ? ?
??
                (5) 
Where u
i
=1/n∑x, (x?class i) is the mean of the i-th 
sample, u=1/m∑x
i
 is the mean of the total samples, m is the 
number of the total samples, n
i
 is the number of the sample i, c 
is the number of the classes, and n
1
+n
2
+…+n
c
=m. LDA needs 
the lower between-class coupling degree and higher 
within-class polymerization degree. Thus, the Fisher criterion 
is introduced: 
? ?
T
B
T
W
W S W
JW
W S W
?
                               (6) 
The optimal projection matrix W can be gotten by 
maximizing J(W). It is easy to prove, to maximize J(W), 
S
B
W=?S
W
W must be met. A sample X can be projected onto 
the LDA optimal discriminant space to get a new sample Y, as 
the following equation 
T
Y W X ?
                                       (7) 
  For the PCA+LDA projection scheme, the matrices A 
and W can be obtained sequentially in the training stage, and 
then a sample X can be projected onto the PCA+LDA 
combination projected space to obtain a new sample Y, as the 
following equation 
TT
Y A W X ?
                                   (8) 
  The minimum distance classifier (MDC) is one of the 
simple and efficient classification methods. MDC firstly 
calculates the center of each class, and then finds the class 
which has the minimum distance from the given input sample 
to the class center, and the input sample is classified into the 
minimum distance class. In this study, MDC is an appropriate 
classifier because the projected feature vectors are easy to 
indentify in a low-dimensional space, thus a complex 
classifier is not necessary. In addition, MDC needs very short 
computing time. 
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
A.  Comparison of three feature projection schemes 
In this section, PCA, LDA, and PCA+LDA were 
compared with each other. The features of Group A (including 
MAV, RMS, ZC, WL, SSC, and ARC) were adopted in this 
comparative study. For the PCA projection scheme, an 
appropriate dimensionality of the PCA-projected space was 
obtained by the experiments. As can be seen in Fig. 7(a), when 
the dimensionality reaches 16, the classification accuracy 
mostly reaches the maximum. Thus, 16 was selected as the 
optimal dimensionality of the PCA-projected space. For 
PCA+LDA projection scheme, as Fig. 7(b) shows, the 
classification accuracy reaches maximum when the 
dimensionality is 18. Therefore, 18 was obtained as the 
parameter for the PCA+LDA scheme. 
 
(a) The scheme of PCA                (b) The scheme of PCA+LDA 
Figure 7.  The classification accuracy vs the dimensionality in the 
PCA-projected spaces of the PCA and PCA+LDA schemes. 
The first eight groups of sEMG signals were used for 
training the projected matrices of the three feature projection 
schemes. The signals of nine kinds of hand/wrist motions were 
segmented from the eight groups respectively. The features of 
Group A were extracted from the segmented samples, and 
then they were used for training the feature projected matrices. 
After training, the feature projected matrices and the centers of 
nine kinds of hand/wrist motions were obtained, and the 
4853
  
clustering effects of the three projection schemes can be 
observed in the projected space. Fig. 8 shows the clustering 
effects of nine kinds of hand/wrist motions in the projected 
spaces of three feature projection schemes respectively.  
 
   (a) PCA                                              (b) LDA 
 
(c) PCA+LDA 
Figure 8.  The clustering effects in the projected spaces of three feature 
projection schemes respectively. 
The last eight groups of sEMG signals were used for test, 
and the classification result of one group of signals is shown in 
Fig. 9. In the figure, HC, HO, IFP, MFP, WF, WE, WRD, 
WUD, RM are labeled as 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, respectively. 
The burrs in the figure are the wrongly classified sample 
points. The number of the wrongly classified samples was 
counted and then was used for calculating the classification 
accuracy. The classification accuracy and the processing time 
are shown in Table III. The process of the processing time 
consists of feature extraction of Group A, feature projection of 
each scheme, and MDC classification. The experiments were 
executed on 2.66GHz Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Quad CPU PC. 
 
Figure 9.  the classification result of one group of sEMG signals 
TABLE III.  AVERAGE VALUES OF CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND 
PROCESSING TIME OF THREE FEATURE PROJECTION SCHEMES 
Classification 
Performance 
Feature Projection Schemes 
PCA LDA PCA+LDA 
Classification accuracy [%] 85.6±2.2 97.4±0.8 97.5±0.7 
Processing time [msec] 0.478 0.495 0.51 
Experimental results showed that PCA had a poor 
classification performance compared with the other two 
schemes, and the classification accuracy of LDA and 
PCA+LDA was very close to each other. PCA is a good tool 
for dimensionality reduction, yet lacks of the ability of the 
class separation. LDA considers the class separabillity when it 
learns from the training samples to obtain a linear optimal 
projected matrix. Thus, LDA had a higher accuracy than PCA. 
Though PCA+LDA did not bring complex computation to the 
projection process, it could not improve the performance of 
the pattern recognition much. Because the three projection 
schemes all obtained a projected linear matrix in the end, the 
processing time of them had no big difference. 
B. Comparison of four groups of features 
In this section, a comprehensive comparative study on the 
performance of four groups of features (see Table II) deriving 
from five analyzing methods was done. The LDA feature 
projection scheme was adopted for the comparative study. 
Four groups of features were extracted, and then they were 
projected to the LDA-projected space, and finally four groups 
of the projected features were classified by the MDC 
classifier, respectively. In the study, the first eight groups of 
sEMG signals were used for training, and the remaining eight 
groups were used for test. The clustering effects of four groups 
of features in the LDA-projected space are shown in Fig. 10. 
The classification accuracy and the processing time of four 
groups of features are shown in Table IV. The process of the 
processing time consists of feature extraction of each group, 
LDA projection, and MDC classification. The experiments 
were executed on 2.66GHz Intel(R) Core(TM)2 Quad CPU 
PC. 
  
(a) Group A                                    (b) Group B 
  
(c) Group C                                            (d) Group D 
Figure 10.  The clustering effects of four groups of features in the 
LDA-projected space. 
TABLE IV.  AVERAGE VALUES OF CLASSIFICATION ACCURACY AND 
PROCESSING TIME OF FOUR GROUPS OF FEATURES 
Classification 
Performance 
Four Groups of features 
Group A Group B Group C Group D 
Classification accuracy 
[%] 
97.4 ±
0.8 
95.1 ±
1.2 
94.1 ±
1.5 
96.2±
0.9 
Processing time [msec] 0.5 37.1 320.1 4.3 
4854
  
It is not easy to see differences between each group from 
the clustering effects, because the classification accuracy of 
the four groups had no big difference from each other. And all 
the features deriving from five analyzing methods had a good 
class separabillity on EMG pattern recognition. However, the 
processing time of the four groups had a big difference from 
each other. The time-domain features from Group A just 
needed a very short processing time, yet the nonlinear entropy 
and fractal analysis features from Group C needed a very long 
processing time. The frequency-domain features from Group 
B had a bearable processing time for some real-time 
applications. The wavelet transform features from Group D 
had a short processing time. The complexity of the features 
has a dominant part of the processing time. If a feature with 
complex calculation hasn’t an outstanding classification 
performance, it should not be selected for real-time 
recognition application. The comparative results indicate that 
the time-domain features and wavelet transform features are 
good choices for real-time EMG pattern recognition owning to 
their excellent performance both in the classification accuracy 
and processing time, and it is not wise to focus excessively on 
new complex features for real-time EMG pattern recognition. 
Nevertheless, long time-consuming features may be good 
choices for the applications without real-time need, for 
example some frequency-domain features have a good 
performance on muscle fatigue study based on EMG. 
C. Real-time myoelectric control for anthropomorphic 
robotic hand 
In order to verify the performance of the proposed pattern 
recognition system in real-time applications, the structure 
consisting of Group A features, PCA+LDA feature projection, 
and MDC classification was employed. An anthropomorphic 
robotic hand which can implement the nine kinds of 
hand/wrist motions was chosen. An accompany video is 
available at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org, and Fig. 11 is one 
screen shot of the video. Experimental result showed that the 
anthropomorphic robotic hand could implement nine kinds of 
hand/wrist motions well as the subject did without perceiving 
a time delay for that the control circle was within an increment 
window (32msec). The subject had an extended physiological 
proprioception during a long time implementation. 
 
Figure 11.  Online real-time control experiments 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have done a comparative study on an 
EMG pattern recognition system based on PCA and LDA for 
an anthropomorphic robotic hand. Four groups of features 
deriving from five analyzing methods were studied 
comparatively. The three feature projection schemes 
including PCA, LDA and PCA+LDA were compared with 
each other. Nine kinds of hand/wrist motions were selected, 
and four channels of sEMG signals from human’s forearm 
were collected. Experimental results indicated that 
PCA+LDA projection didn’t improve the recognition 
performance much compared to LDA projection, and the 
time-domain features and wavelet transform features were 
able to obtain a better performance on both the classification 
accuracy and the processing time compared to the 
frequency-domain features, nonlinear entropy features and 
fractal analysis features. In this study, the features of Group A 
going with PCA+LDA projection and MDC classification 
obtained the classification accuracy of 97.5±0.7%, and just 
needed the processing time of 0.51msec. The online real-time 
myoelectric control for the anthropomorphic robotic hand 
was implemented, and experiments showed that the 
anthropomorphic robotic hand was synchronized nicely with 
the human’s hands without perceiving a time delay. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Otto Bock HealthCare, Product Brochure, Feb.2013, Available: 
http://www.living-with-michelangelo.com/fileadmin/downloads/techn
iker/english/technician_product_brochure.pdf 
[2] Touch Bionics, Inc., i-Limb Ultra Data Sheet, Feb. 2013, Available: 
http://www.touchbionics.com/media/2210/i-limb%20ultra%20data%2
0sheet%20lo-res.pdf 
[3] C. Cipriani, M. Controzzi, and M. C. Carrozza, “The SmartHand 
transradial prosthesis,” NeuroEng. Rehabil. J., vol. 8, p. 29, 2011. 
[4] R. N. Scott, “Myoelectric control of prostheses,” Arch. Phys. Med. 
Rehabil. J., vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 174–81, Mar. 1966.  
[5] P. A. Parker and R. N. Scott, “Myoelectric control of prostheses,” Crit. 
Rev. Biomed. Eng. J., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 283–310, 1986. 
[6] P. Parker, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “Myoelectric signal 
processing for control of powered limb prostheses,” Electromyogr. 
Kinesiol. J., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 541–8, Dec. 2006. 
[7] L. Dipietro, M. Ferraro, J. J. Palazzolo, H. I. Krebs, B. T. Volpe, and N. 
Hogan, “Customized interactive robotic treatment for stroke: 
EMG-triggered therapy,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 
13, no. 3, pp. 325–334, Sep. 2005. 
[8] M. B. I. Raez, M. S. Hussain, F. Mohd-Yasin, “Techniques of EMG 
Signal Analysis: Detection,” Processing, Classification and 
Applications, Biological Procedures Online (BPO), vol. 8, pp. 11–35, 
2006. 
[9] I. Guyon, S. Gunn, M. Nikravesh, and L. A. Zadeh, “Feature 
Extraction: Foundations and Applications,” Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer-Verlag, 2006. 
[10] L. Hargrove, K. Englehart, and B. Hudgins, “A comparison o f surface 
and intramuscular myoelectric signal classification,” IEEE Trans. 
Biomed. Eng., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 847–853, May 2007. 
[11] F. Zhang, P. Li, Z. Hou, Y. Chen, F. Xu, J. Hu, Q. Li, and M. Tan, 
“SEMG feature extraction methods for pattern recognition of upper 
limbs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Adv. Mechatron. Syst., pp. 222–227, 
Aug. 2011. 
[12] D. Zhang, A. Xiong, X. Zhao, and J. Han, “PCA and LDA for 
EMG-based Control of Bionic Mechanical hand,” in Proc. IEEE 
Int.Conf.Information and Automation, pp. 960–964, June 2012. 
[13] J. Zhao, L. Jiang, H. Cai, H. Liu, “EMG pattern recognition method for 
prosthetic hand based on wavelet transformand sample entropy,” 
Control and Decision, vol. 22, no. 8, pp. 927–930, Aug. 2007. 
[14] G. Naik, D. Kumar, and S. Arjunan, “Use of sEMG in identification of 
low level muscle activities: Features based on ICA and fractal 
dimension,” in Proc. Ann. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., pp. 
364–367, Sep. 2009. 
4855
