 
 
 
? 
Abstract—This paper presented a novel compliant actuator 
used for lower limb exoskeletons. The compliant joint consists of 
a series elastic actuator (SEA) and parallel elastic (PE) unit. 
SEA has various advantages as the actuator of assistive 
exoskeletons, such as low output impedance, impact absorption, 
precise force control and high stability. We designed and 
fabricated a novel SEA as the primary joint actuator which is 
compact, adjustable and low-cost. Meanwhile an additional 
elastic unit is installed in parallel with the SEA to improve 
energy utilization by storing and releasing energy during motion 
cycles. An adaptive stable controller is designed to realize the 
joint following motion to a virtual limb. The algorithm can 
identify and compensate the undetermined contact stiffness 
between the joint output and the virtual limb. Finally, the 
performance of the actuator is evaluated through motion 
tracking and energy-conservation experiments. Preliminary 
results indicate the validity of the design and imply its potential 
usage in lower limb exoskeletons.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
TUDY of powered human exoskeleton robot began in the 
late 1960s [1]. After decades of research, a variety of 
exoskeleton robots for human performance enhancement 
and rehabilitation have been developed. Some typical and 
successful examples of exoskeleton robots are the Berkeley 
Lower Extremity Exoskeleton(BLEEX) of the University of 
California, Berkeley [2], the Raytheon/Sarcos XOS 
exoskeleton suit of Raytheon company, the Hybrid Assistive 
Limb (HAL)-5 exoskeleton [3] of the University of Tsukuba 
and the rehabilitation robot Lokomat [4] which is used with 
the treadmill. All of these exoskeletons use traditional 
actuators, such as hydraulic actuators and motors.  
However, because the exoskeleton robot should work with 
human, new compliant actuators that can insure the safety and 
comfort of the man-machine interaction have become one of 
current focuses of research. Series elastic actuator (SEA) [5], 
[6], by introducing elastic between the traditional actuator 
and the load, is a good solution to the above problem and has 
already been used in some exoskeletons.  
Roboknee [7], actuated by a linear SEA, is a 1 DOF knee 
exoskeleton for enhancing strength and endurance during 
walking. User intent is determined through the knee joint 
angle and ground reaction forces. Torque is applied across the 
 
*This work was supported by National High Technology Research and 
Development Program of China (863 Program) under Grant 2012AA041505 
and National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61004076).  
Yanhe Zhu, Jixing Yang, Hongzhe Jin, Xizhe Zang, Jie Zhao are with the 
State Key Laboratory of Robotics and System, Harbin Institute of 
Technology.  
Yanhe Zhu is the corresponding author(yhzhu@hit.edu.cn). 
knee in order to allow the user’s quadriceps muscles to relax. 
University of Twente has developed a gait rehabilitation 
exoskeleton, called LOPES [8]. Each leg of LOPES has three 
actuated rotational joints, which are actuated by Bowden 
cable based SEA. The joints are impedance controlled to 
allow bidirectional mechanical interaction between the robot 
and the training subject. The Wilmington Robotic 
Exoskeleton (WREX) [9] , is a gravity balanced upper limb 
orthosis for children with muscular weakness. In order to 
increase the range of joint motion of children, and to make the 
exoskeleton able to lift a substantial weight, series elastic 
actuators were attached to two joints of WREX. There are 
also many other series elastic actuators developed for 
exoskeleton, [10]-[12]. 
Continuous working time is a great challenge to mobile 
exoskeletons due to the capacity limitation of power source. 
To solve this problem, PE unit can be used to improve energy 
utilization by storing and releasing energy during motion 
cycles.  
Although some articles have analyzed the effects of 
parallel-and series elasticity in an actuator, to the best of our 
knowledge, there are still no such prototypes been fabricated 
and tested. 
This paper designed and fabricated a new type of 
exoskeleton compliant actuator by combining the SEA and 
the PE unit together. Part II introduces the work principle of 
the SEA and PE unit. Part III introduces the design process of 
the compliant actuator. In part IV, a control algorithm which 
has considered the change of the contact stiffness between 
human and exoskeleton is designed. Finally, the validity of 
the designed control algorithm and performance of the 
prototype are evaluated in part V. 
II. WORKING PRINCIPLE 
A. Series elastic actuator 
Series elastic actuator is a device with bionic 
characteristics, which introduces elastic element between the 
traditional actuator and the load. SEA has been applied in the 
human-machine interaction and walking robots, etc. 
Series elastic actuator has the following characteristics: 
low output impedance, impact resistance ability, high force 
control precision and stability, capability of energy storage to 
improve the efficiency of the system [5]-[7]. 
Based on the above advantages, SEA is decided to be used 
in our design. The bevel gears are used to change the 
transmission direction. Schematic diagram of the designed 
SEA is shown in Figure 1.  
Design and Evaluation of a Parallel-Series Elastic Actuator for 
Lower Limb Exoskeletons* 
Yanhe Zhu, Member, IEEE, Jixing Yang, Hongzhe Jin, Xizhe Zang and Jie Zhao, Member, IEEE 
S 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1335
 
 
 
 
B. Parallel elastic unit 
Passive biped walking theory is proposed by the Canadian 
scholar McGeer in 1990s [13]. The core of passive walking is 
to improve the utilization efficiency of gravity potential 
energy by realizing the alternately transformation between 
the gravity potential energy and kinetic energy in the process 
of walking. In this paper, the principle of passive walking is 
used in the design of parallel elastic unit. 
In order to analyze the process of energy transformation in 
the walking, simulations of human walking and the 
exoskeleton walking were realized with ADAMS and 
BRG.LifeMOD. Following are the exoskeleton joint power 
curves (Figure 2) and joint angle curves (Figure 3) in the 
sagittal plane. 
 
As can be seen in Figure 2, in a gait cycle (about 1 second), 
there is a period for all the joints, when the joint power is 
negative. It can be seen from the hip joint angle curve in 
Figure 3 that the hip joint extends from 0 degree to the 
maximum extension angle, namely the support limb rotates 
from the vertical position to oblique position when the hip 
joint do negative work. In other words, gravity potential 
energy of the system reduces, when the hip joint do negative 
work. 
 
However, the motor can't store the reduced gravity 
potential energy, resulting in energy waste. Thus an energy 
saving project is proposed: During the negative work phase, 
by introducing conservative force components in the joint 
(such as a spring) to do work instead of the motor, 
gravitational potential energy could be transformed into 
elastic potential energy. By releasing the stored energy in 
positive work phase, the recycling of the gravity potential 
energy is achieved. 
Although it can be taken as the energy recycling element, 
series elasticity generates output force executing directly on 
the driving motor, which will lead to considerable electrical 
energy consuming. Therefore, pure passive spring in parallel 
with the joint is used to store the gravitational potential 
energy and improve energy utilization. 
III. DEVICE DESIGN 
A compact joint with a SEA and a PE unit is designed. The 
CAD model of the joint is shown in Figure 4. A brushless DC 
servo motor is chosen as the power source. The motor is 
connected with the encoder and the output shaft of the motor 
is connected with a planetary gear reducer. The motor and the 
joint base are placed in parallel, reducing the lateral width of 
the exoskeleton, but this configuration needs to introduce an 
additional mechanism to change the transmission direction by 
90 degree. This paper uses a pair of bevel gears whose 
reduction ratio is 3:1. The big bevel gear is fixedly connected 
to plate 1 by pins and screws and the plate 2 is fixedly 
connected to the joint shaft. Series elasticity is placed 
between the plate 1 and plate 2, whose concrete structure will 
be introduced in the following. 
Figure 5 is the internal structure of the joint: plate 2 is 
connected with the joint shaft by key and will transfer torque 
to the shaft; joint shaft is connected with joint output link by a 
cylindrical pin. In addition, an angle sensor is mounted on the 
joint shaft inside the joint: the sensor casing is fixed to the 
joint shaft by a sleeve and the sensor output shaft is fixed to 
the joint base through the end cover. 
A. Design of the SEA 
The designed series elasticity is shown in Figure 6. Disk 
spring is used as the elastic element between the plate 1 and  
 
 
Fig 3 Exoskeleton joint angle curves 
 
Negative
Power 
 
Fig 2 Exoskeleton joint power curves 
Joint base
DC servo 
motor
Gear 
reducer
Bevel 
gears
Joint 
output
Series elasticity
 
 
Fig 1 Schematic diagram of the series elastic actuator 
1336
 
 
 
 
 
plate 2. Disk spring has the characteristics of small size, high 
rigidity and high stability. A plurality of disk springs in series 
composes disk spring group, whose rigidity is inversely 
proportional to the number of disk springs and can be adjusted 
by change of the number of the disk springs. The design here 
uses three groups of disk springs evenly distributed on the 
circumference of plate 2. The relative rotation between plate 1 
and plate 2 will compress the spring groups and the elastic 
forces of the springs generate a pure torque. 
 
According to the need of the exoskeleton, stiffness design 
principle of the disk springs is that the angle difference of 
plate 1 and plate 2, 10
m
???, for the transfer of maximum 
torque. 
According to the exoskeleton simulation results, 
considering the effect of friction, we assume that the 
maximum joint torque 50N m T?? . The arm of spring force 
N is 20mm R? . 
When the maximum torque is transferred, the spring force 
N is: 
 
50
N 833N
3 3 0.02
T
N
R
? ? ?
?
 (1) 
Due to the rotation angle is very small, change of the 
transmission radius is ignored. Thus the compression of disk 
spring group is: 
 tan 20 tan10 3.5mm
m
R ?? ? ? ? ?? (2) 
Disk spring stiffness is: 
 / 238N/mm KN ? ?? (3) 
Each spring group contains 10 disk springs and stiffness of 
each spring is 2380N/mm. 
B. Design of the PE unit 
According to the previous analysis, the PE unit here is only 
designed for the hip joint. The elastic element used in the PE 
unit is a leaf spring. One end of the spring is connected with 
the output link of the joint and the other end is in a free state 
and can just contact with the joint base when the joint is in the 
0? position. By adjusting the position of sliding sleeve, the 
stiffness of the spring can be changed to adapt to different 
loads. The CAD model of the PE unit is shown in Figure 4.  
The process of energy storage and release of the PE unit 
can be equivalent to the process shown in Figure 7: From state 
A to state B, center of gravity of the system goes down and 
the spring is bended for the sake of gravity, namely the 
gravitational potential energy is transformed into elastic 
potential energy. From state B to state C, the joint stretches 
and the leaf spring releases the stored energy. From state C to 
state D, the leaf spring is separate from the joint base and the 
PE unit doesn't work. 
 
A B C D
G
G
?
P
h
L
 
 
Fig 7 Process of energy storage and release 
N
R
Bevel gear
Plate 1
Plate 2
Disk spring group
 
Fig 6 Series elasticity 
 
Joint shaft
End cover
Angle sensor
Sleeve
Joint base
Joint output link
Plate 2
 
Fig 5 Internal structure of the joint 
Joint base
Joint
Leaf spring
Sliding sleeve
Encoder
Servo motor
Reducer
Bevel gear
Series elasticity
Joint output link
 
Fig 4 CAD model of the joint 
1337
 
 
 
In order to reduce the force generated by the motor, the 
torque produced by the parallel spring should be as similar as 
possible to the load torque changed with joint angle. 
According to the simulation results, the hip torque relative to 
the joint angle changes approximately in a linear growth from 
0, when the exoskeleton hip joint do negative work. The 
following is a validation of the similarities between the elastic 
torque of the spring and the exoskeleton required torque. 
Firstly, the finite element analysis of the leaf spring 
bending deformation is done, as shown in Figure 8. 65Mn is 
selected as the spring material, whose elastic modulus 
E=200Gpa, Poisson's ratio is 0.3. Analysis results show that, 
the deflection of the leaf spring is proportional to the force at 
the end of the spring, which means that the spring can be 
analyzed as a simple straight rod.  
Installation dimension of the leaf spring, h, L, and the force 
between spring and exoskeleton, P are shown in Figure 7. So 
the torque generated by the spring is: 
 
2
32
3 sin
cos cos
h EIh
TP
L
?
? ?
? ? ? (4) 
The above I is the moment of inertia of the leaf spring 
cross-section. From the formula, it is known that in 30 ~ 0 ?? , 
the elastic moment and the joint angle have approximately 
linear relationship, which coincides with the exoskeleton joint 
torque in the negative work phase. 
 
 
IV. CONTROL METHOD 
For exoskeleton, following the human position is the 
foundation to realize the walking assistance. 
In this paper, the position deviation between human leg and 
the exoskeleton is changed into force signal. Follow motion 
of human leg is accomplished by controlling the contact force 
between the exoskeleton and human body.  
In order to realize the precise control of the contact force, 
this paper adopts an adaptive stable algorithm, [14], [15], for 
the exoskeleton robot joint, which is based on inner velocity 
loop PI controller with desire force feedforward and is 
applied to estimate the contact stiffness between the 
exoskeleton and human body. 
The contact stiffness between human and the exoskeleton 
is () kt ; the contact flexibility is ( ) 1/ ( ) t k t ? ? ; the force 
measuring point on the exoskeleton is ()
e
xt ; the force 
measuring point on the human leg is ()
h
xt ; the contact force 
between the exoskeleton and leg is () ft . We can get the 
following formula:  
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
eh
x t t f t x t ??? (5) 
The velocity loop PI controller with desire force 
feedforward is:  
 ( ) ( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
d d f f
x t t f t K f t I f t ? ? ? ? ? ? (6) 
In the above formula, ()
d
xt is the desired exoskeleton 
speed, 
d
f is the desired contact force, ( ) ( ) ()
d
f t f t f t ? ? ? , 
() t ? is estimated value of () t ? , 
f
K , 
f
I are the coefficients 
of PI controller. Here, 0
d
f ? , which means that the 
exoskeleton needs to help people overcome gravity. 
The following iterative algorithm is used to identify the 
contact flexibility online:  
 ( ) ( ) ( ), 0
d
t f t f t ? ? ? ?? ? ? (7) 
This algorithm makes the control law adaptive to the 
stiffness change between human and exoskeleton, which 
ensures that better force control can be achieved. Control 
system block diagram is shown in Figure 9.  
It can prove that the system is stable, if we have the 
condition, lim ( ) lim[ ( ) ( )] 0
ed
tt
x t x t x t
?? ??
? ? ? ? , according to 
the articles [14], [15]. 
 
d
f
s
?
PI
1
s
k
h
x
e
x
d
x
d
x
e
x
f
?
?
?
?
?
?
Motor 
velocity 
loop
1
s
s
k Exoskeleton
p
k
m
x
m
x
p
f
s
f
l
f
? ?
?
?
?
?
  
 
Fig 9 Control system block diagram 
 
 
Fig 8 Finite element analysis of the leaf spring 
1338
 
 
 
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
A. Test platform 
Test platform for the actuator is shown in Figure 10. A 
PC-104 microcomputer is selected as the host computer. The 
Elmo Simple-IQ driver is chosen for PWM control of the 
motor. RS232 serial port communication is used between the 
driver and the host computer. In addition, a PCM-3718 A/D 
acquisition card is added for the acquisition of the signals 
from a joint angle sensor, a pressure sensor and a precision 
resistance. A brushless servo motor whose rated power is 
400W and rated speed is 3000r/min, is selected as power 
source. A 2500P/r incremental encoder and a planetary gear 
reducer with the 20:1 transmission ratio are attached to the 
motor. 
 
B. Motion tracking test 
A motion tracking test is done without the PE unit. The 
swing of a virtual limb, instead of human leg? is used as input 
signal of the test. A position deviation sensor is set between 
the virtual limb and output link of the joint. The controller 
designed above is used to carry out the test.  
Figure 11 shows the structure and working principle of the 
position error sensor, which converts position information to 
pressure information through the combination of two 
symmetric compression springs and a piece of pressure sensor. 
Springs in the sensor are pre compressed at zero error position. 
When there is position deviation between the virtual limb and 
the exoskeleton, the spring is stretched or compressed, 
causing the change of pressure sensor output. The sensor 
pressure range is 0-4.5N and the output voltage, which is 
proportional to the pressure, has a range of 0-5V.  
 
The experimental results are shown in Figure 12. Figure 
12-a) and 12-b) are respectively the exoskeleton joint angle 
curve and angular velocity curve in the position tracking 
experiment. It can be seen that the movement of the joint is 
stable and there is no local oscillation in the test process. 
Figure 12-c) is a pressure curve from pressure sensor in the 
process of experiment. The spring pre pressure is 0.8N and 
the maximum pressure deviation is 0.7N, which means that 
the resistance force between the leg and joint is very small. 
Considering the stiffness of the spring is 0.15N/mm, the 
maximum position deviation is 4.67mm. According to the 
distance from the installation position of the sensor to the 
joint axis, which is 300mm, it is clear that the maximum angle 
deviation is 0.89 degree.  
From the analysis on the experimental results, we can draw 
the conclusion: precise position tracking can be acquired 
based on the designed control method above. 
 
C. Energy-conservation test 
In order to verify the energy-conservation effect of the PE 
unit, the motion test with load is needed. In this test, the joint 
is placed upside down and the joint load is simulated by a 10 
kg weight installed at the end of the joint output link. The 
energy-conservation effect of the PE unit can be proved by 
the comparison of power consumption of the test with or 
without the PE unit. In the test, the joint angle is controlled by 
the simulated joint angle from ADAMS.  
The energy-conservation test is only for the hip joint of the 
exoskeleton. From part III, we know that, the leaf spring will 
separate from the joint base, when the joint angle is bigger 
than 0? , which is not associated with energy saving, so this 
experiment contains only the part in which the joint angle is 
30 ~ 0 ? ? ? .  
The joint torque created by the weight is: 
 sin T G L ? ?? ? (8) 
Among the formula (8), G' is the gravity of the weight, L' 
as the distance from center of gravity to the joint axis and ? 
is the joint angle. The torque produced by the weight is 
corresponding to the joint load torque, for sin? varies 
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
-50
0
50
Joint angle(deg)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
-100
0
100
Angular velocity(deg/sec)
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
0
1
2
Time(sec)
Pressure(N)
 
 
a)
b)
c) spring preload
 
Fig 12 Experimental results of position tracking test 
Joint output link
Virtual limb
Spring
Pressure sensor
P1
P2
x ?
   a) Structure of the sensor                 b) Working principle of the sensor 
Fig 11 Position error sensor 
Weight
PC-104 
and
 PCM-3718
Current 
acquisition
Motor 
driver
Joint output link
SEA and PE unit
Virtual limb
 
Fig 10 Test platform 
1339
 
 
 
approximately linearly with ? , when ? changes from 30 ?? 
~ 0? . 
The motor's total power can be calculated through the 
acquisition of input voltage (48V) and current of the motor. 
The current is acquired by measure the voltage across a 
precise resistance. 
The joint swung 100 cycles with or without the leaf spring 
respectively. Figure 13 shows the power curve of a cycle. The 
solid line represents the motor power consumption of test 
without the leaf spring and the dashed represents the motor 
power consumption of test with the leaf spring. Changed from 
18W to 7W, the motor peak power is reduced by 60%. 
Average of the energy integrated from the power of the 100 
cycles is 3.82J without PE unit and 1.85J with PE unit, which 
means adding the leaf spring saves 52% energy . 
 
As can be seen, the power consumption of the joint is 
significantly reduced with the PE unit. 
The energy-conservation effect of PE unit is successfully 
validated by the experimental results, but the measured motor 
power has large fluctuation. Considering the used joint 
control method for this parallel-series elastic actuator is only 
stable, but not optimal, further research on the joint control 
method is needed to reduce the fluctuation of the motor 
power. 
As the elastic force of the PE unit has not fully fit the joint 
torque, there still has space for improvement in the 
energy-conservation effects. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
This paper designed and evaluated a novel compliant 
actuated joint used for lower limb exoskeletons, which 
consists of a series elastic actuator and parallel elastic unit. 
1) A parallel-series elastic actuator is designed. Instead of 
special designed components, three groups of low-cost disk 
springs are used to form a compact series elasticity. A parallel 
elastic unit, consisting of a leaf spring and a sliding sleeve, is 
designed for improving the system energy utilization with 
different loads.  
2) An adaptive stable algorithm based on inner velocity 
loop PI controller with desire force feedforward, is proposed 
for the joint control. Then, the performance of the actuator is 
evaluated through motion tracking and energy-conservation 
experiments. 
Preliminary results imply its potential usage in lower limb 
exoskeletons. Further research on the joint control method 
and performance improvement is needed. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work is supported by National Hi-tech Research and 
Development Program of China(Grant #2012AA041505) and 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 
61004076). The authors express gratitude for the financial 
support. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Aaron M. Dollar, Hugh Herr, “Lower Extremity Exoskeletons and 
Active Orthoses: Challenges and State-of-the-Art,” IEEE Transactions 
on Robotics, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 144-158, 2008. 
[2] Adam B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and Andrew Chu, “Biomechanical 
Design of the Berkeley Lower Extremity Exoskeleton (BLEEX),” 
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 128-138, 
2006. 
[3] Yoshiyuki Sankai, “HAL: Hybrid Assistive Limb Based on 
Cybernics,” Springer Tracts in Advanced Robotics, vol. 66, n STAR, pp. 
25-34, 2010. 
[4] S. Jezernik, G. Colombo, T. Keller et al, “Robotic Orthosis Lokomat: A 
Rehabilitation and Research Tool,” Neuromodulation: Technology at 
the Neural Interface, vol. 6, no. 2, pp: 108-115, 2003. 
[5] Gill A. Pratt, Matthew M. Williamson, “Series Elastic Actuators,” in 
IEEE International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 
1, pp. 399-406, 1995. 
[6] David William Robinson, “Design and Analysis of Series Elasticity in 
Closed-loop Actuator Force Control,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mechanical 
Engineering., Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2000.  
[7] Jerry E. Pratt, Benjamin T. Krupp, Christopher J. Morse et al, “The 
RoboKnee: An Exoskeleton for Enhancing Strength and Endurance 
During Walking,” in Proceedings - IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, vol. 2004, no. 3, pp. 2430-2435, 2004. 
[8] Jan F. Veneman, Rik Kruidhof, Edsko E. G. Hekman et al, “Design and 
Evaluation of the LOPES Exoskeleton Robot for Interactive Gait 
Rehabilitation,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and 
Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 379-386, 2007. 
[9] Daniel Ragonesi, Sunil Agrawal, Whitney Sample et al, “Series Elastic 
Actuator Control of a Powered Exoskeleton,” in Proceedings of the 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society, EMBS, pp. 3515-3518, 2011. 
[10] Claude Lagoda, Alfred C. Schouten, Arno H. A. Stienen et al, “Design 
of an electric Series Elastic Actuated Joint for robotic gait rehabilitation 
training,” 2010 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference on 
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, BioRob 2010, pp. 21-26, 
2010. 
[11] Kyoungchul Kong, Joonbum Bae, Masayoshi Tomizuka, “A Compact 
Rotary Series Elastic Actuator for Human Assistive Systems,” 
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 17, no. 2, 2012. 
[12] Fabrizio Sergi, Dino Accoto, Giorgio Carpino et al, “Design and 
Characterization of a Compact Rotary Series Elastic Actuator for Knee 
Assistance During Overground Walking,” in Proceedings of the IEEE 
RAS and EMBS International Conference on Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics, pp. 1931-1936, 2012. 
[13] Tad MacGeer, “Passive Dynamic Walking,”, International Journal of 
Robotics Research, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 62-82, 1990. 
[14] Jaydeep Roy, Louis L. Whitcomb, “Adaptive Force Control of 
Position/Velocity Controlled Robots: Theory and Experiment,” IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 121-137, 
2002. 
[15] Yanhe Zhu, Xizhe Zang, Jihong Yan, “Transparent haptic interaction 
for admittance type haptic interfaces,” Journal of Harbin Institute of 
Technology (in Chinese), vol. 41, no. 3, pp: 22-25, 2009. 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7
0
5
10
15
20
Time(sec)
Motor power(W)
 
 
without parallel spring
with parallel spring
 
Fig 13 Power of motor with and without the PE unit 
1340
