Towards a Functional Evaluation of Manipulation Performance
in Dexterous Robotic Hand Design
Maximo A. Roa
1
, Zhaopeng Chen
1
, Irene C. Staal
2
, Jared N. Muirhead
3
,
Annika Maier
1
, Benedikt Pleintinger
1
, Christoph Borst
1
, Neal Y . Lii
1
Abstract— Dexterous multiﬁngered hands are the most com-
plex and versatile variants of robotic end effectors. Compared
to simpler grippers and underactuated hands, they should be
more capable of grasping and, especially, manipulating different
objects. This paper explores the relationship between kinematic
design and manipulation performance of robotic hands. Some
evaluation criteria frequently used by hand designers to verify
kinematic conﬁgurations are revisited. The results from these
criteria are scrutinized and compared with the evaluation of
the manipulation workspace and the ranges of motion of in-
hand manipulation for a set of predeﬁned objects. Simulations
and actual manipulation experiments are carried out with
different kinematic conﬁgurations on a modular dexterous
hand. The results show some disconnection between perceived
good designs through common evaluation criteria and their
actual, realizable manipulation performance. This work ﬁnally
gives some insight toward a more holistic approach to design
hands that better address grasp and manipulation for the
intended tasks and applications.
Index Terms— hand evaluation; precision grasp; in-hand
manipulation; dexterous end effector.
I. INTRODUCTION
The human hand is often regarded as the best end effector
in existence; as a result, it is frequently viewed as the ultimate
performance goal by some roboticists. However, its multi-
ple capabilities, including gesturing, grasping, manipulation
and exploration of objects, are still difﬁcult to replicate
in a single and compact tool for use in common robotic
systems. In highly structured industrial environments most
of the grasping and manipulation tasks can be efﬁciently
solved using two or three-jaw grippers, or task oriented
tools such as suction cups or electromagnetic grippers [1].
Multiﬁngered hands are better suited for less structured
environments, where a broader set of capabilities is re-
quired for handling multiple objects with different mass,
shape and material, which would involve an assortment of
grasping and manipulation tasks. Different conﬁgurations
and actuation mechanisms have been developed over several
decades of research, such as the Barrett Hand [2], Robonaut
Hand [3], Gifu Hand III [4], DLR/HIT Hand II [5], Shadow
Dexterous Hand [6], and Awiwi Hand [7]. Replicating the
same kinematics and anatomical structure of the human,
as in the ACT Hand [8], is a ﬁrst step towards a better
understanding of the human functionality, but still requires
1
Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics, German Aerospace Center
(DLR), Wessling, Germany. Email: {firstname.lastname}@dlr.de
2
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Delft University of Technology,
The Netherlands.
3
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, CA, USA.
Fig. 1. A ﬁve-ﬁnger modular robotic hand commanded by a teleoperator
with a data glove during a telemanipulation experiment [16]. The dexterous
end-effector shows both grasping and in-hand manipulation capabilities.
appropriate control and sensor systems to mimic human
dexterous capabilities.
In terms of ﬂexibility for grasping different types of
objects, developments in underactuated hands have shown
that a low number of actuators driving coupled degrees of
freedom (DoF) can also lead to successful grasps [9], [10].
This type of hands tends to have limited to no manipu-
lation capabilities. However, with additional mechanisms,
some basic manipulation functions can be achieved [11],
[12]. The same phenomenon occurs in the related ﬁeld
of hand prosthesis, where weight restrictions and the need
of a compact solution make underactuated designs more
feasible. Currently, the most advanced prosthetic hands such
as the i-Limb [13], Michelangelo [14] and Bebionic [15]
have only six DoF, ﬂexion/extension of each ﬁnger plus
a passive abduction/adduction of the thumb, which makes
them sufﬁcient for simple grasping of objects, but unable to
tackle tasks requiring higher dexterity such as using scissors
or buttoning a shirt.
Comparison of the features and abilities of these hands
has been carried out based on physical characteristics (size,
weight, number of ﬁngers, number of DoF, number and type
of actuators), kinematic properties (range of motion per joint,
closing speed) or basic dynamic information (maximum
force at the ﬁngertips) [17], [18]. The evaluation of the
ability to grasp objects has been performed by computing an
index of dexterity that considers the kinematic conﬁguration
of the hand, its available sensors and control system [19];
however, it does not consider the evaluation of grasping in
actual hardware implementation. The comparison of hand
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6800
performance can also be carried out for speciﬁc objects
using the graspability maps [20]. These maps show for
one object and one given hand the potential locations for
the hand that lead to a force closure grasp on the object.
Functional comparisons are possible when the types of grasps
are considered, i.e. when a qualitative evaluation of the
number of different achievable grasp types is performed. For
example, the Awiwi hand of the DLR Hand-Arm System [21]
is able to reproduce the complete sets of grasps presented in
taxonomies of human prehension proposed by Cutkosky [22]
and Feix [23].
Multiﬁngered dexterous hands, considered as versatile end
effectors, are meant not only for pick and place tasks, but
should also be able to perform sufﬁcient amount of ﬁne grasp
and manipulation, as for instance carried to some success
in [16] (Fig. 1). Existing robot hand designs are nonetheless
far from being able to perform a “universal” set of grasp
and manipulation tasks. This paper presents a ﬁrst step
towards a systematic approach to improve end effector me-
chanical design through simulation and experimental valida-
tion/veriﬁcation. We revisit several design criteria commonly
used in the design of anthropomorphic robotic hands, and ex-
plore ﬁne grasp and manipulation performance for different
kinematic conﬁgurations of hands. For this purpose, we take
advantage of the modularity and rapid reconﬁgurability of the
DLR/HIT Hand II. Through manipulation experiments and
simulation, we conﬁrm the limited manipulation capability
of the standard conﬁguration, which can be greatly enhanced
with the redesign of the thumb position and orientation
with respect to the other ﬁngers. This leads to different
functional relationships between the ﬁngers, which translates
into variations in the behavior of the hand in manipulation
tasks.
This paper begins by summarizing common design crite-
ria used in the mechanical design of multiﬁngered hands,
and explores possibilities to evaluate in-hand manipulation
capabilities (Section II). The rationale behind the different
kinematic conﬁgurations tested in this work is then explained
(Section III), and the experimental results for the evaluation
of ﬁne grasp and manipulation capabilities are presented
afterwards (Section IV). To conclude, a discussion of the
ﬁndings and potential extensions of the work is presented
(Section V).
II. EVALUATION OF MANIPULATION CAPABILITIES
The variety of grasp behaviors in the human hand has been
classiﬁed using different taxonomies, as the ones proposed
by Cutkosky [22] or Feix [23]. Traditional qualitative eval-
uation of robotic hand capabilities focuses on reproducing
as many grasp types as possible using a given taxonomy
as a reference [7]. As for manipulation, a hand-centric
taxonomy has been recently proposed that describes the
variety of manipulation tasks achievable by a human/robot
hand [24]. Performance-oriented tests have been developed
for the assessment of human hand dexterity, although their
application to robotic systems is not evident [25], [26].
This work, in turn, conducts quantitative tests for measuring
manipulation abilities, as the mere observation of whether a
hand can reproduce certain grasp or manipulation types is not
enough to give roboticists a concise comparison of suitability
of different robot hands for the intended applications.
A. Precision grasp
The opposition movement of the thumb is the key fac-
tor for achieving a precision grasp with the hand [27].
In medicine, the Kapandji test [28] has been proposed to
indirectly measure the grasp ability of the human hand. In
this test, the range of motion of the thumb is estimated
by moving it to a predeﬁned list of positions (ﬁngertips
and some joints/links) on the other ﬁngers. The successful
completion of the test implies that the hand is able to
successfully grasp objects from a kinematic point of view.
The concepts from this test were previously proposed as an
indicator of the grasping ability of robotic hands [7], [29],
[30], and are used here in the same sense. A ﬁrst performance
index P
1
is considered as the total number of predeﬁned
target positions that the thumb can reach. Note that the test
considers intrinsically, but not actively, the role of parallel
ﬁngers’ motion in the opposition movement and in grasping
tasks, considering as parallel ﬁngers all but the thumb.
Another option to evaluate the inﬂuence of the thumb in
grasping tasks is computing the volume v
i
of intersection
between the thumb workspace and the workspace of each
ﬁnger i, which in the analysis of human grasps is referred to
as the functional workspace for precision manipulation of the
i-th ﬁnger [31]. A second performance index P
2
is obtained
as the sum of the intersection volumes, i.e.P
2
=
P
4
i=1
w
i
v
i
,
with w
i
a suitable weighting factor that can be used to
stress the importance of the opposition to certain ﬁngers.
Intuitively, the larger P
2
the better the hand for grasping
different objects. This criterion has been used, for instance,
for deﬁning the thumb position in the Gifu Hand III [4].
B. Fine manipulation
The ability for manipulation can be evaluated by com-
puting the manipulation workspace, i.e. the set of possible
object locations that allow some degree of manipulation
on a given object. A multiﬁngered hand can be seen as a
collection of small manipulators (ﬁngers) with a common
base (palm), and the hand workspace can be seen as the
union of the workspaces of each ﬁnger. However, the ma-
nipulation workspace is object-dependent, as handling the
real object implies that the object must be grasped at all
times during the manipulation, i.e. there must exist feasible
contact locations on the object, and there must not be ﬁnger
to ﬁnger/palm collisions. These factors are not considered
in the computation of the hand workspace. Furthermore, the
deﬁnition of manipulability depends on a particular grasp
on the predeﬁned object that is manipulated. The study of
the workspace for 3D manipulation of polygonal/polyhedral
objects has been previously carried out using optimization
techniques and considering the object geometry, hand joint
limits, force constraints, and collision avoidance [32]. As a
result, given an initial grasp on the object, the workspace that
6801
Fig. 2. The modular ﬁve-ﬁnger hand, based on components from the
DLR/HIT Hand II, and its manipulation coordinate system. In this imple-
mentation, the coordinate system’s orientation is ﬁxed to the robot hand,
with the X-axis being the bisector of the angle between the thumb and the
opposing ﬁnger during the initial grasp of the object. The origin of the
coordinate system is set to the centroid of the initial grasp [16].
contains the possible rotations and translations of the object
while guaranteeing the grasp is obtained.
We are interested in the general performance of a hand
manipulating objects (using a precision grasp), therefore we
aim to ﬁnd not only the manipulation workspace, but also the
range of manipulation achievable in each DoF of the object.
For each object we consider the three translational and
rotational degrees of freedom, according to the coordinate
system of the hand presented in Fig. 2. To obtain the
manipulation workspace and the range of manipulation, we
discretize the workspace of the hand, then locate the object
in one of the possible positions inside the workspace, and
ﬁnd a suitable initial force closure (FC) grasp. Given the
object pose with respect to the hand, the reachable points on
the object surface are computed using the workspace of each
ﬁnger, and the points closest to the ﬁngertips that guarantee
a FC grasp are chosen as the initial contact points [33].
Once this initial grasp is obtained, the object can be moved
a small step in the desired direction of manipulation, and the
new object position should still allow a reachable FC grasp.
The procedure is repeated until a non-feasible position is
reached, i.e. a position that is not reachable for the ﬁngers,
leads to self-collisions, or does not allow a FC grasp on
the object. The contacts between ﬁngertips and object are
considered to be rolling contacts, and the ﬁngertips are
represented as pointclouds that describe the possible points
of contact, as shown in Fig. 3. The size of the manipulation
workspace of an object should decrease with the number of
contacts. Therefore, for the performance evaluation we used
3 ﬁngers to grasp different objects, both in simulation and
in experiments; results are discussed in Section IV.
III. MODULAR TESTBED
Finger positioning is integral to a robot hand’s perfor-
mance. As addressed earlier, the thumb is the single most
important ﬁnger in an anthopomorphic end effector [27]. As
a result, we believe that thumb placement serves as a good
starting point to examining the effects of ﬁnger positioning
on the hand on grasp and manipulation performance.
Fig. 3. Simulation of manipulation of a ball, in this case rotation in the
X-direction.
TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS FOR DIFFERENT THUMB LOCATIONS
Thumb base
module
Opposing
ﬁnger
Orientation from
opposing ﬁnger
Orientation
from palm
Original Middle 30
?
40
?
I-50
?
Index 50
?
90
?
I-60
?
Index 60
?
90
?
I-70
?
Index 70
?
90
?
M-50
?
Middle 50
?
90
?
M-60
?
Middle 60
?
90
?
M-70
?
Middle 70
?
90
?
Due to the lack of a roll joint of the thumb in our base
robot hand module, its placement becomes even more critical
to the effectiveness of the hand [34]. This is a problem that
occurs also in prostheses design, in the cases where the
thumb has a ﬁxed position [14]. To deﬁne some relevant
thumb conﬁgurations for the experiments, we carried out a
series of simulations to search for suitable thumb placements.
The aperture angle of the thumb with respect to the palm
inﬂuences the manipulability of objects with different sizes;
smaller thumb placement angles optimize toward grasping
smaller (e.g. paper-thin) objects, whereas larger angles are
more suited for larger objects. To simplify the analysis
of different conﬁgurations, the thumb is located in direct
opposition to the index or middle ﬁngers, and in a 90
?
angle with respect to the palm. With these considerations,
we include in the present study six conﬁgurations in addition
to the original one, as summarized in Table I. Based on
Yoshikawa’s work on manipulability [35], we set for each
ﬁnger the conﬁguration with the highest manipulability in-
dex, and, given an aperture angle, we located the thumb in a
cartesian position that guarantees that a pinch grasp is always
possible, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Fig. 5 shows two examples
of the real implementation of different thumb locations on
the modular hand.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Precision grasp
The Kapandji test was performed on all seven thumb
placements of the modular robotic hand. The thumb was
moved to try to reach with the ﬁngertip all the links of the
6802
0
50
100
150
?40
?20
0
20
0
50
100
150
200
0
50
100
150
?40
?20
0
20
0
50
100
150
200
Fig. 4. Examples of simulated hand kinematics. The magenta circles mark
the center point of each ﬁngertip in two conﬁgurations, relaxed and pinch
grasp. The joint conﬁguration for the pinch grasp is the one that provides the
highest manipulability according to Yoshikawa [35]. In the left, the thumb
is placed opposing the index ﬁnger at an angle of 50
?
, whereas the right
ﬁgure illustrates the thumb opposing the middle ﬁnger at an angle of 70
?
.
Fig. 5. Implementations of different thumb conﬁgurations with the modular
hand. On top, the relaxed and pinch grasp conﬁgurations are shown for
the thumb placed directly opposing the index ﬁnger at 50
?
. The same
conﬁgurations are shown at the bottom when the thumb opposes the middle
ﬁnger at 70
?
.
parallel ﬁngers. Each ﬁnger is indicated by its ﬁrst letter (In-
dex, Middle, Ring and Little ﬁnger), and links are indicated
with P (proximal phalange), I (intermediate phalange), and D
(distal phalange). Results of the test are presented in Table II.
Note that the original thumb conﬁguration can reach all the
12 points of contact in the Kapandji test, as the hand was
speciﬁcally designed for fulﬁlling the requirements of this
test. The performance index P
1
allows a direct comparison
of the results for different thumb conﬁgurations.
Table III summarizes the results for the computation of
the functional workspace for each ﬁnger, and presents the
performance index P
2
that allows the comparison between
TABLE II
KAPANDJI TEST RESULTS WITH SEVEN DIFFERENT THUMB
CONFIGURATIONS
M-50
?
M-60
?
M-70
?
I-50
?
I-60
?
I-70
?
Orig.
I-D X X X X X X X
I-I X X X X X X X
I-P x x x x x x X
M-D X X X X X X X
M-I X X X X X X X
M-P x x x x x x X
R-D X X X X X X X
R-I X X X X X x X
R-P x x x x x x X
L-D x X X x x x X
L-I x X x x x x X
L-P x x x x x x X
P1 6 8 7 6 6 5 12
Rank 4 2 3 4 4 7 1
(tied) (tied) (tied)
TABLE III
FUNCTIONAL WORKSPACE OF THE FINGERS (INcm
3
)
M-50
?
M-60
?
M-70
?
I-50
?
I-60
?
I-70
?
Orig.
Index 11.51 3.60 0.47 47.58 30.52 18.58 35.59
Middle 55.76 40.26 27.29 3.89 0.72 0.42 33.79
Ring 10.91 3.20 0.46 0 0 0 5.80
Little 0 0 0 0 0 0 0.003
P2 78.17 47.07 28.23 51.46 31.24 19.01 75.18
Rank 1 4 6 3 5 7 2
different thumb conﬁgurations. Note that in conﬁgurations
where the thumb opposes the middle ﬁnger, the correspond-
ing functional workspace of the middle ﬁnger is the largest
among all the parallel ﬁngers; for the thumb conﬁgurations
opposing the index ﬁnger, the largest functional workspace
corresponds to the index ﬁnger.
As a ﬁnal qualitative veriﬁcation, basic geometric shapes
(boxes, cylinders and spheres) were grasped with the dif-
ferent hands, and no signiﬁcant difference in behavior was
detected, other than the initial relative pose between hand and
object had to be adjusted according to the hand geometry.
B. Fine manipulation
To compare different thumb conﬁgurations, the tech-
nique described in Section II-B is employed to obtain the
workspace and possible ranges of motion for three different
balls of radius 20, 35 and 42.5mm. The simulation is cross
checked with experiments using the same objects. For the
experiment, the balls are placed in a predeﬁned position
with respect to the hand, ﬁngers are closed and then the
object is manipulated in the desired DoF until the object
is dropped or until the ﬁngers cannot provide additional
motion in the desired direction. The control of the internal
forces to guarantee the FC grasp is performed using a spatial
impedance controller [36].
Fig. 6 presents the simulated and experimental results of
this manipulation. Note that the simulations guarantee that
6803
0.00
20.00
40.00
60.00
80.00
100.00
120.00
140.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Translation-20mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Translation-35mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
0.00
50.00
100.00
150.00
200.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Translation-42.5mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
0.00
1.00
2.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
6.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Rotation-20mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
3.50
4.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Rotation-35mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
0.00
0.50
1.00
1.50
2.00
2.50
3.00
M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Rotation-42.5mmball
Simulation 3Fingerexperiment Unlimitedexperiment
Fig. 6. Results of simulation and experiments manipulating three balls of different sizes. Translations are measured in mm, and rotations are measured
in rad.
Fig. 7. Examples of comparing simulation and actual manipulation of
a ball, in this case for translation in the X-direction. Although simulation
can show an accurate trend of manipulation capabilities, it has difﬁculties
dealing with situations where the manipulation range can be extended with
the loss of contact by a ﬁnger. In this case, the middle ﬁnger lost contact
with the object, but the object was still securely grasped with the remaining
two ﬁngers, and the X-translation motion continued for an extended range.
The photos of the actual in-hand manipulation have been rotated 90
?
for
easier comparison with the simulation results.
the three ﬁngers are always in contact with the ball, but
this condition is not necessarily satisﬁed in the experiments,
as illustrated in Fig. 7. Therefore, the experimental results
are presented with two different bars, one showing the total
range of motion including the restriction of all the ﬁngertips
being in contact with the object (“3-ﬁnger” experiment), and
another one showing the total motion obtained even though
one ﬁnger had been detached from the object (“unlimited”
experiment). The “unlimited” experimental results generally
show an extension of manipulation range, which has not been
simulated. The original thumb conﬁguration is not shown, as
in the experiments with that conﬁguration the objects were
grasped but the motion in most of the directions was either
impossible or negligible. Note that the simulation results
are conservative; in general, they underestimate the motion
of the ball with respect to the motion obtained during the
experiments. Simulations do not capture behaviors such as
the rotation of the ball over one of the links, i.e. outside
the area considered as ﬁngertip in the simulations, or cases
where one ﬁnger loses contact but the remaining ﬁngers still
guarantee a FC grasp and the object is still manipulable. Note
also that during the experiments there is an important source
of error in the location of the ball with respect to the hand.
The combination of the previous factors is more critical for
smaller objects, which show the larger difference between
the limited (“3-ﬁnger”) and “unlimited” experiment.
Fig. 6 compares experiments and simulations for one
initial position of the balls with respect to the hand. However,
in simulation one can afford to try all the possible locations
of the object inside the hand workspace, and verify the
possible ranges of motion for each one of those positions. For
performing the simulations, the potential hand workspace is
discretized, and each discrete point is considered as an initial
position of the object; then, the simulation of manipulation is
performed, as described in Section II-B. Fig. 8 shows for in-
stance the workspace for two different thumb conﬁgurations,
for the three different ball sizes. The size of the manipulation
workspace is related to the number of spheres in each ﬁgure.
The diameter of each sphere represents the translational
capabilities, and the color indicates the rotational capabilities
for manipulating the object initially located in the center of
such sphere. For visualization, we used the addition of the
ranges of motion along the three axis of movement (L
1
norm)
6804
Fig. 8. Workspaces and manipulation ability for two different thumb conﬁgurations: I-50
?
(top), and M-60
?
(bottom). The sphere size is an indicator of
the translational capabilities, and the color indicates the rotational capabilities for manipulating the object initially located in the center of such sphere.
0
10000
20000
30000
40000
50000
60000
Original M-50 M-60 M-70 I-50 I-60 I-70
Workspacevolume
20mm 35mm 42.5mm
Fig. 9. V olume of the manipulation workspace (in mm
3
) for three balls
of different sizes.
for deﬁning the size and color of each sphere.
Fig. 9 presents the volume of the manipulation workspace
for the seven different thumb conﬁgurations. Note that the
original thumb conﬁguration provides very small manipu-
lation capabilities, which illustrates the limitations of this
thumb placement. For instance, this conﬁguration was barely
able to grasp the largest ball, and no manipulation was
possible in this case. Note also that the thumb locations with
an angle of 50
?
provide a larger workspace for the small ball,
and the conﬁgurations with an angle of 70
?
provide larger
workspaces for larger balls.
C. Discussion
On applying human-based metrics to robot hand design:
Different tests were applied to assess the performance of
several hand conﬁgurations in ﬁne grasping and manipulation
tasks. The Kapandji test was originally proposed for surgeons
to check the grasp ability of human hands by verifying
the ability of the thumb to reach predeﬁned locations. The
thumb is similarly important in dexterous humanoid robot
hands [27], and should be closely examined during design.
Perhaps due to the lack of a more robotic-focused test metric,
the Kapandji test (or modiﬁed versions of it) is often used to
determine the viability of a robotic hand design. However, the
designer can sometimes (unintentionally) ignore the human
speciﬁc kinematics implications and only aim for an empir-
ical match. Furthermore, precision grasp and manipulation
are tasks where physical contacts with the target object are
6805
made only with the ﬁngertips. This is in clear contrast with
the Kapandji test, in which the thumb should make contact
with each joint/link of every ﬁnger. The computation of the
functional workspace for the ﬁngers has also been proposed
to measure the grasp ability of a given hand kinematics, but it
is also strongly oriented towards human-like conﬁgurations.
For instance, the computation of such measure on a Barrett
hand will result in a very low value of functional workspace
for all the ﬁngers. With these aspects in mind, we believe
that such human-based tests should be applied cautiously for
the design of robotic hands.
The original DLR-HIT hand II is a case of an anthro-
pomorphic hand whose kinematics differs from the human
hand, with the most glaring differences including the iden-
tical speciﬁcations for all ﬁve ﬁngers, and the lack of a roll
joint in the base of the thumb. It scored a perfect 12 out
of 12 on the Kapandji test, as shown in Table II, and had
also a high score in terms of functional workspace, as shown
in Table III. However, as a manipulator, it is less capable
than hands with our modiﬁed thumb conﬁgurations (lower
volume of the manipulation workspace and lower ranges of
motion for the tested objects). Inversely, the modiﬁed thumb
positions examined in this work have lower scores on the
Kapandji test, although all of them had signiﬁcantly better
manipulation performance. As a result, we are not able to
draw direct correlations between the Kapandji test score or
the size of the functional workspace, which have been used
as traditional criteria in the design of robotic hands, with
actual robotic hand manipulation performance. Our ﬁndings
point to the need for test metrics which are tailored to the
characteristics of robot hand design and target tasks. The
test metrics should be holistically designed to cover both
functionalities, grasping and manipulation, while taking into
account the kinematic conﬁguration of the end effector.
On the simulation of manipulability: Simulations have
shown to be an effective tool to complement experimental
evaluation, particularly for providing an initial assessment
of the hand performance, and for identiﬁcation of trends in
the hand behavior. However, simulations have limitations;
for example, the current implementation is purely based on
kinematics, and does not include information on forces and
torques. Also, for the computation of the ranges of manipula-
tion in predeﬁned directions, the ﬁngertip is assumed to have
a ﬁnite geometry, and once the object loses contact with such
geometry the simulation is stopped. However, reality shows
that ﬁne manipulation is still achievable even when the object
is rolling on the link surface and not on the ﬁngertip, or
when one of the ﬁngers loses contact but the object is still
grasped within the hand. Mainly these phenomena explain
the differences obtained between the simulated manipulation
workspace and the real one obtained via experimentation.
Nevertheless, the general trend in the behavior of different
hand conﬁgurations was sufﬁciently captured by the simula-
tions to make them a valuable design aid.
The right hand for the right job: All hands, including
the human hand, have limitations. Imagine using a human
hand to pick up a strand of hair, from a table top, or to
grasp a basketball: these examples demonstrate the object
size limitations on both ends of the scale. We observed
a similar phenomenon in the different thumb placements,
where the narrower thumb angles (M-50
?
and I-50
?
) can
better manipulate smaller objects (e.g. 20mm ball), whereas
the larger thumb placement angles (M-70
?
and I-70
?
) per-
form better with larger objects. This implies that every hand
conﬁguration has a range of object size that it is suited to
manipulate, with both a minimum and a maximum size limit.
With this understanding, we can better select a conﬁguration
for a set of tasks based on the sizes of the target objects.
V. FINAL REMARKS
Different end effectors have been created to provide grasp
and manipulation functionalities for robotic applications.
Although speciﬁc grippers or tools can be designed for
particular tasks in structured environments, a more versa-
tile end effector is required for normal environments that
for instance require human-robot interaction. Multiﬁngered
hands can provide this versatility; however, most of them
have been designed based on qualitative behaviors or on
metrics focused on the grasping ability and inspired by the
human hand, which do not always ﬁt robot designs with
widely different kinematics. Nevertheless, current dexterous
robotic hands are already capable of more difﬁcult in-hand
manipulation tasks, as shown in in this paper.
A ﬁrst study of the performance of a multiﬁngered robotic
hand was presented in this work, and the attached video
presents examples of the evaluation experiments. To un-
derstand the functionality of the hands, several tests were
discussed, focused on the main applications of current robot
hands: grasping and manipulation. Different hand conﬁgura-
tions were considered by changing the location and orienta-
tion of the thumb. It was shown that traditionally accepted
criteria for designing robotic hands, such as the Kapandji
test and the functional workspace, do not necessarily imply
larger manipulation workspaces or better manipulation per-
formances. Also, the consideration of manipulability for the
hand can greatly improve the versatility of the end effector
without affecting signiﬁcantly their behavior for common
grasping tasks.
The results also make evident that every hand, whether
human or robotic, has a range of objects that it can properly
handle. This implies that there are some minimum and
maximum object sizes for obtaining a desired manipulability.
This insight and information can aid in the selection of a
suitable hand conﬁguration for the target tasks.
The creation of guidelines for designing new modular end
effectors would be a valuable contribution for the continua-
tion of this work. This paper chose to focus on the manip-
ulation and the preceding ﬁne grasp aspects of hand design,
taking into account the inﬂuence of the thumb location.
The inﬂuence of additional parameters like ﬁnger and link
lengths is a possible extension of the analysis. Also, power
grasps have not yet been considered. However, a general-
purpose multiﬁngered hand should demonstrate sufﬁcient
power grasp capabilities for the broader versatility needed to
6806
service more applications and environments. Suitable metrics
for measuring such ability are yet to be properly deﬁned and
integrated with qualitative metrics as the ones presented here.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Monkman, S. Hesse, R. Steinmann, and H. Schunk, Robotic
Grippers. Wiley VCH, 2007.
[2] W. Townsend, “The Barrett hand grasper - programmably ﬂexible part
handling and assembly,” Industrial Robot, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 181–188,
2000.
[3] C. Lovchik and M. Diftler, “The Robonaut hand: a dexterous robot
hand for space,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation -
ICRA, 1999, pp. 907–912.
[4] T. Mouri, H. Kawasaki, K. Yoshikawa, J. Takai, and S. Ito, “Anthropo-
morphic robot hand: Gifu hand III,” in Int. Conf. Control, Automation
and Systems, 2002, pp. 1288–1293.
[5] H. Liu, K. Wu, P. Meusel, N. Seitz, G. Hirzinger, M. Jin, Y . Liu, S. Fan,
T. Lan, and Z. Chen, “Multisensory ﬁve-ﬁnger dexterous hand: The
DLR/HIT hand II,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots
and Systems - IROS, 2008, pp. 3692–3697.
[6] Shadow Robot Company, “The Shadow dexterous hand.” [Online].
Available: http://www.shadowrobot.com/products/dexterous-hand/
[7] M. Grebenstein, M. Chalon, W. Friedl, S. Haddadin, T. Wimb¨ ock,
G. Hirzinger, and R. Siegwart, “The hand of the DLR hand arm
system: Designed for interaction,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 31,
no. 13, pp. 1531–1555, 2012.
[8] A. Deshpande, Z. Xu, M. Vande, B. brown, J. Ko, L. Chang,
D. Wilkinson, S. Bidic, and Y . Matsuoka, “Mechanisms of the anatom-
ically correct testbed (ACT) hand,” IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatronics,
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 238–250, 2013.
[9] L. Birglen, T. Laliberte, and C. Gosselin, Underactuated Robotic
Hands. Springer, 2008.
[10] A. Dollar and R. Howe, “The highly adaptive SDM hand: Design and
performance evaluation,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 5, pp.
585–597, 2010.
[11] L. Odhner and A. Dollar, “Dexterous manipulation with underactuated
elastic hands,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation -
ICRA, 2011, pp. 5254–5260.
[12] V . Tincani, M. Catalano, E. Farnioli, M. Garabini, G. Grioli, G. Fan-
toni, and A. Bicchi, “Velvet ﬁngers: A dexterous gripper with active
surfaces,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems - IROS, 2012, pp. 1257–1263.
[13] Touchbionics, “i-Limb Ultra prosthetic hand.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.touchbionics.com/products/active-prostheses/i-limb-ultra/
[14] Ottobock, “Myoelectric hand prostheses.” [Online]. Available:
http://www.ottobock.de/cps/rde/xchg/ob com en/hs.xsl/5057.html
[15] RSLSteeper, “Bebionic hand.” [Online]. Available:
http://bebionic.com/the hand
[16] N. Y . Lii, Z. Chen, M. A. Roa, A. Maier, B. Pleintinger, and
C. H. Borst, “Toward a task space framework for gesture commanded
telemanipulation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Robot and Human
Interactive Communication - RO-MAN, 2012, pp. 925–932.
[17] J. Bellter and A. Dollar, “Performance characteristics of anthropo-
morphic prosthetic hands,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Rehabilitation
Robotics, 2011, pp. 921–927.
[18] D. Alba, M. Armada, and R. Ponticelli, “An introductory revision to
humanoid robot hands,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on Climbing and Walking
Robots - CLAWAR, 2005, pp. 701–712.
[19] L. Biagiotti, F. Lotti, C. Melchiorri, and G. Vassura, “How far is
the human hand? a review on anthropomorphic robotic end-effectors,”
Internal Report - University of Bologna, 2004.
[20] M. A. Roa, K. Hertkorn, F. Zacharias, C. Borst, and G. Hirzinger,
“Graspability map: A tool for evaluating grasp capabilities,” in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems - IROS, 2011,
pp. 1768–1774.
[21] M. Grebenstein, A. Albu-Schaffer, T. Bahls, M. Chalon, O. Eiberger,
W. Friedl, R. Gruber, S. Haddadin, U. Hagn, R. Haslinger, H. Hopp-
ner, S. Jorg, M. Nickl, A. Nothhelfer, F. Petit, J. Reill, N. Seitz,
T. Wimb¨ ock, S. Wolf, T. Wusthoff, and G. Hirzinger, “The DLR hand
arm system,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation -
ICRA, 2011, pp. 3175–3182.
[22] M. Cutkosky, “On grasp choice, grasp models, and the design of
hands for manufacturing tasks,” IEEE Trans. Robotics and Automation,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 269–279, 1989.
[23] T. Feix, R. Pawlik, H. B. Schmiedmayer, J. Romero, and D. Kragic,
“A comprehensive grasp taxonomy,” in Robotics Science and Systems
- RSS, Workshop on Understanding the Humand Hand for Advancing
Robotic Manipulation, 2009.
[24] I. Bullock, R. Ra, and A. Dollar, “A hand-centric classiﬁcation of
human and robot dexterous manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Haptics, vol. 6,
no. 2, pp. 129–144, 2013.
[25] K. Yancosek and D. Howell, “A narrative review of dexterity assess-
ments,” J. Hand Therapy, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 258–269, 2009.
[26] C. Light, C. P.H., and P. Kyberd, “Establishing a standardized clinical
assessment tool of pathologic and prosthetic hand function: Normative
data, reliability, and validity,” Archives of Physical Medicine and
Rehabilitation, vol. 83, pp. 776–783, 2002.
[27] M. Chalon, M. Grebenstein, T. Wimb¨ ock, and G. Hirzinger, “The
thumb: guidelines for a robotic design,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems - IROS, 2010, pp. 5886–5893.
[28] A. Kapandji, “Cotation clinique de l’opposition et de la contre-
opposition du pouce,” Annales de Chirurgie de la Main, vol. 5, no. 1,
pp. 68–73, 1986.
[29] M. Chalon, A. Wedler, A. Baumann, W. Bertleff, A. Beyer, J. Butter-
fass, M. Grebenstein, R. Gruber, F. Hacker, E. Kraemer, F. Landzettel,
M. Maier, H. Sedlmayr, N. Seitz, F. Wappler, B. Willberg, T. Wim-
boeck, G. Hirzinger, and F. Didot, “Dexhand: A space qualiﬁed
multi-ﬁngered robotic hand,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Automation - ICRA, 2011, pp. 2204 –2210.
[30] S. Shin, S. Han, K. Lee, H. Moon, H. R. Choi, and J. C. Koo, “A design
framework for dexterous robotic hand,” in Intl. Conf. on Ubiquitous
Robots and Ambient Intelligence, 2011, pp. 539 –541.
[31] L.C.Kuo, H. Chiu, C. Chang, H. Hsu, and Y . Sun, “Functional
workspace for precision manipulation between thumb and ﬁngers in
normal hands,” J. Electromyography and Kinesiology, vol. 19, pp.
829–839, 2009.
[32] Y . Guan, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, and Z. Guan, “Workspace of 3-
D multiﬁngered manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems - IROS, 2008, pp. 2679–2684.
[33] M. A. Roa, K. Hertkorn, C. Borst, and G. Hirzinger, “Reachable
independent contact regions for precision grasps,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Conf. Robotics and Automation - ICRA, 2011, pp. 5337–5343.
[34] H. Wang, S. Fan, and H. Liu, “An anthropomorphic design guideline
for the thumb of the dexterous hand,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Mechatronics and Automation, 2012, pp. 777–782.
[35] T. Yoshikawa, “Manipulability of robotic mechanisms,” Int. J. Robotics
Research, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 3–9, 1985.
[36] Z. Chen, N. Y . Lii, T. Wimboeck, S. Fan, and H. Liu, “Experimental
evaluation of cartesian and joint impedance control with adaptive
friction compensation for the dexterous robot hand DLR-HIT II,” Int.
J. of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 8, no. 4, p. 649, 2011.
6807
