  
? 
Abstract— Stimulated by recent biomechanics research of 
the cheetah, a novel tail controller system for rapid acceleration 
and braking is presented. To understand the targeted 
behaviour of a cheetah performing a longitudinal manoeuvre 
and the effects an actuated tail has, a simple mathematical 
template was developed. Subsequently feedback controllers 
were designed based on our hypothesis. Finally, the control 
system was experimentally tested on a reduced order robot 
model which increased its manoeuvrability considerably.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
A recent biomechanics study [1] indicates that the cheetah 
(Acinonyx jubatus) is not only the fastest terrestrial animal 
but possibly also the most manoeuvrable. In their findings, 
the authors suggest that the animal’s ability to rapidly brake 
and accelerate could be assisted by the animal’s lengthy tail. 
However, if the cheetah is using its tail for these manoeuvres, 
what is the neuromechanical strategy for doing so? 
The biomechanics literature defines Manoeuvrability as 
an animal’s ability to change its velocity vector in a 
controlled manner [2] [3]. This consists of either the ability to 
change the body’s velocity magnitude (braking/accelerating) 
or adjusting its direction (turning). The dexterity with which 
an animal can do so is crucial for its survival. Nevertheless, 
our understanding of these transient and dynamic 
manoeuvres is still very limited as stated by Alexander [4]. 
This investigation was inspired by the “Pitch then Power 
Model” by Williams et al. [5]. In their study the authors 
demonstrate that a quadruped animal’s ability to accelerate 
and brake is limited by its avoidance of toppling over (much 
like a motorcycle “popping a wheelie”). Toppling arises due 
to the force (propulsive or braking), causing a net moment 
about the COM. We hypothesise here that the cheetah can 
employ the tail as an actuator in a pitch rate control loop to 
negate this effect. This would allow it to circumvent the 
aforementioned model.  
Furthermore, our hypothesis is motivated by various 
wildlife videos of the cheetah in pursuit of prey where it can 
be seen actuating its tail while manoeuvring. Additionally, 
this particular study is enthused by video observations (see 
Fig. 1.) of cheetahs at the Cheetah Outreach conservation 
centre in Cape Town, South Africa.   
 
 
Corresponding author: a.patel@uct.ac.za. *Department of Electrical 
Engineering, University of Cape Town, South Africa 
1 2
3 4
 
Fig. 1. A cheetah is shown rapidly braking while chasing a lure 
during a weekly exercise run. Note the motion of the tail in the 
sagittal plane. (Filmed by one of the authors at Cheetah Outreach in 
Cape Town, South Africa). 
Animals employ tails for a broad range of tasks including 
airborne attitude control [6] and disturbance rejection [7]. 
Inspired by this, various researchers have successfully 
implemented attitude control and disturbance rejection on 
robotic platforms [8] [9] [10] [11]. Moreover, tails have been 
proven to be more effective at short timescale manoeuvres 
than reaction wheels [8] [11]. 
Specific applications of robotic tails for manoeuvrability 
tasks have also been implemented. Kohut et al. have 
successfully implemented rapid turning on a hexapod using 
an actuated tail [12] [13]. Also, drawing inspiration from the 
cheetah’s tail, Patel & Braae have successfully implemented 
tail control systems for rapid turning at high-speed [14] and 
rapid acceleration on a simulated quadruped [15]. 
This paper will investigate the use of an actuated tail for 
rapid acceleration and braking manoeuvres. Firstly, in 
Section II following the paradigm of biomechanical 
templates [16], we develop a reduced-order dynamic model 
to describe the targeted behaviour of an animal (a cheetah in 
our case) performing an acceleration (or braking) manoeuvre. 
Here, simple models with and without a tail are compared 
and it is shown that with a tail actuator, more aggressive 
acceleration manoeuvres are possible. In Section III and IV, 
we will refine the model for the robotic test platform that was 
developed. This section also includes the design of novel tail 
controller algorithms as well as simulation of rapid 
acceleration and braking manoeuvres. In Section V, the 
experimental results are provided for the robotic platform. 
Finally, Section VI discusses the experimental results from 
which conclusions are drawn and future avenues of research 
are recommended.   
Rapid Acceleration and Braking: Inspirations from the Cheetah’s 
Tail 
Amir Patel*, Student Member, IEEE and M. Braae*, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 793
  
II. THE LONGITUDINAL MANOEUVRE TEMPLATE 
Templates and anchors are a concept utilized to explain 
control strategies for animal locomotion [16]. Animals 
elegantly employ a synergy of muscles to perform high-level 
(task) behaviour. In essence, animals are often considered to 
be hyper-redundant but their task-level behaviour can be 
described by reduced-order models called Templates [17]. 
Well known templates are the Spring Loaded Inverted 
Pendulum (SLIP) and the Lateral Leg Spring (LLS) models 
[18].  Anchors in contrast are more detailed and complex 
models, which closer align to the animal’s morphology. 
Although simplistic, templates offer a powerful mechanism 
to provide insight into neuromechanical control. 
A. Equations of Motion 
Inspired by the Pitch then Power Model [5], we propose a 
template to capture the task-level behaviour of a cheetah 
during a rapid acceleration
1
 manoeuvre. This model although 
conservative and simple, provides valuable insight into the 
limitations of manoeuvrability as well as the dynamic effect a 
tail would have in these scenarios. 
It is stated that during a rapid acceleration or braking 
manoeuvre, the hind and forelegs respectively are the 
primary forces acting on the body [5] [19]. Where, by contact 
with the substrate and by use of hip torque (or shoulder 
torque in the case for braking) the animal is propelled. If we 
further consider the abdomen, legs and head as one collective 
rigid body the mathematical model can be reduced 
significantly. 
With the addition of an actuated tail, the proposed 
Longitudinal Manoeuvre Template (LMT) is depicted in Fig. 
2.  
?
b
? 
m
b
? 
m
t
I
b
?
t
 
Direction of Motion
a
b
Body
Y
X
x
F
a
1
2
F
b
 
Fig. 2. The Longitudinal Manoeuvre Template (LMT) model is 
depicted. The model consists of a collective rigid body and a point 
mass tail. The model experiences either force F
a 
when undergoing 
an accelerating manoeuvre or F
b
 when braking. 
The propulsive force (F
a
) can be envisioned as a force 
input acting at the rear contact point of the collective rigid 
body with the ground. Similarly, for deceleration the force 
(F
b
) input can be considered to be acting at the front contact 
 
1
 The template for the acceleration and braking manoeuvres are 
essentially the same except that the external force is applied at different 
points on the body. 
point. These forces will be generated by some combination of 
leg actuation.  
The tail is modelled as a point mass attached to an 
idealized massless rod of length  
 
. Furthermore, the tail is 
actuated by an ideal torque actuator which is located some 
distance, b, away from the centre of mass (COM) of the 
collective body. 
A number of assumptions were made in deriving the 
mathematical model. Firstly, it is assumed that during 
acceleration or braking only one force acts on the body. This 
is biomechanically accurate as for example during 
acceleration initiation, propulsion occurs primarily from the 
hind leg. Secondly, we have considered a fixed geometry. 
Clearly a cheetah is capable of flexing its spine which will 
shift the collective COM around. However, we believe that 
our assumptions result in a conservative model which will 
still provide an understanding of the limitations in 
manoeuvrability and the positive effects a tail can provide.  
Unlike the Pitch then Power Model, we present a 
dynamic model. The system dynamics are modelled using the 
Euler-Lagrange method [20] [21] described by the equation
2
: 
 
 ( ) ?  (   ?) ?  ( )       
(1) 
and the generalized coordinate vector is given by: 
   [   
 
 
 
]
 
  (2) 
where,   is the COM longitudinal position of the rigid body 
with respect to the inertial frame,  
 
 is its pitch angle with 
respect to the horizon and  
 
 is the relative angle between the 
tail and body. Additionally,  ,   and   are geometric 
properties of the collective body. 
The acceleration and braking forces can be seen as 
generalized forces acting the body [20] and can be derived as: 
   [
  
 
 
 
  
]  (3) 
with  
 
 equating to     (   
 
) when accelerating and 
    (   
 
) when braking. 
Also, note that the system contains hybrid dynamics and 
when the pitch angle  
 
 falls to zero the constraint force (the 
   term), is activated
3
. This constrains the angle and 
prevents the model from falling through the ground.   
Now that the system dynamics have been defined, the two 
manoeuvres can be simulated to determine the effectiveness 
of the tail actuator. 
B. Simulation 
In order to examine the benefits of an actuated tail for 
manoeuvrability tasks, we simulate models with and without 
the tail experiencing various force magnitudes (for braking 
and accelerating). It is predicted from the Pitch then Power 
model that there will be a point when the respective forces 
will be too excessive and will result in the body toppling 
over.  
 
2
 For the sake of brevity, the elements of the M, C, A and G matrices 
have been omitted as their derivation is fairly trivial. 
3
 For the braking model, the pitch angle is constrained to be negative. 
794
  
For the cheetah the parameters of the model are derived 
from geometric measurements provided by [1] [22] with the 
centre of mass assumed to be midpoint of the back length. 
The cheetah tail length is provided by [23], however to our 
knowledge no measurements exist for the tail mass. Thus, we 
will assume it is 10% of the total body mass. The parameters 
are summarised in Table I.  
TABLE I.  ESTIMATED CHEETAH MODEL PARAMETERS 
Parameter Value 
Body Mass (  
 
) 45 (kg) 
Body Roll Inertia ( 
 
) 7.344 (kgm
2
) 
Tail Mass ( 
 
) 4.5 (kg) 
Tail Length ( 
 
) 0.75 (m) 
Distance to COM (a) 0.7 (m) 
Angle to COM ( ) 1.03 (rad) 
Tail distance to COM (b) 0.36 (m) 
  
As indicated previously, we hypothesise that the tail is 
being employed as an actuator in a pitch rate control loop. 
So, as a first attempt at a controller, the tail will be driven 
with a simple proportional controller (with a gain of 50).  
The mathematical models were implemented in Simulink 
and numerically simulated. Each of the models (tailed and 
tailless) was subjected to various constant propulsive and 
braking forces. The simulations terminated when the body 
flipped over, or the tail reached its full swing of 90 degrees. 
The resulting pitch angles as a function of acceleration force 
is depicted in Fig. 3. 
 
Fig. 3. Acceleration force and resultant pitch angle plot. It is 
evident that the tailless model topples over when accelerating 
aggressively. Comparatively, the model with the tail can experience 
greater accelerations as the resultant pitch angle is decreased. 
The results for this simple simulation study are 
instructive. They illustrate that it is indeed possible for the 
cheetah to benefit from actuating its tail to negate the pitch 
rate incurred by manoeuvring. However, the results also 
demonstrate that a simple proportional controller is 
inadequate as a steady state error is incurred for larger 
magnitudes of acceleration.  
 With these preliminary results, the next step was to 
experimentally validate the hypothesis on an experimental 
platform. 
III. ROBOT TEST PLATFORM 
The Dima robot [14] was selected as the platform to test 
the rapid acceleration and braking hypothesis discussed 
previously. The robot is a high-speed platform previously 
designed to test a novel tail control system for turning at 
high-speed and its electrical, software and mechanical design 
is described in [14].  
 
Fig. 4. Dima [14] was modified with a set of bevel gears to allow 
the tail to move in the pitch axis. 
The robot’s tail was modified for these tests to allow 
motions in the pitch axis. This was achieved by the addition 
of a set of bevel gears coupled to the Maxon DC motor of the 
tail as illustrated in Fig. 4. 
One may argue the relevance of testing the hypothesis on 
a wheeled platform but considering the discussion in Section 
II, the LMT model provides a common “task encoder” [16]. 
For example, one can substitute the forces generated by a leg 
propelling the collected rigid body forwards for a wheel in 
contact with the ground. This is essentially the mechanism of 
moving from a template to an anchor. The task-level 
behaviour is fundamentally the same: a force is acting on a 
rigid body (cheetah or robot) to accelerate it. 
Now that the platform has clearly been defined we delve 
deeper into the controller design for the two manoeuvrability 
tasks. These will then be simulated in order to validate them 
before field testing.  
IV. RAPID DECELERATION 
A. Force Model Identification 
To implement the braking force on the body various 
options were considered. A pneumatic disc brake system was 
considered, but due to weight and space constraints this was 
not feasible. Ultimately, it was decided to implement an 
arrestor system based on a fishing reel (Okuma Convector) 
and 1mm nylon line. The line was tied in between the two 
front wheels and the fishing reel bolted to the ground. The 
reel was engaged to simulate a large deceleration force.  
To adequately design the tail controllers, an accurate 
model of this braking force was required. We can assume that 
795
  
the line behaves visco-elastically and can be modelled as a 
second order system [24]. Thus the force is described as: 
  
 
      ? (4) 
where, E is the elastic modulus,   is the strain and   is the 
viscosity of the material. In order to estimate these 
parameters for this linear model, data was logged on board 
the Dima robot and rapid braking tests were performed 
without the tail.  
The parameters were then estimated using Matlab’s 
‘lsqnonlin’ function for nonlinear curve fitting. This was 
done by matching the linear models coefficients to the 
nonlinear braking model simulation for Dima. The LMT 
model parameters for Dima are provided in Table II. The 
parameter fit and experimental data are also graphically 
compared in Fig. 5. 
TABLE II.  DIMA MODEL PARAMETERS 
Parameter Acceleration Braking 
Body Mass (  
 
) 5 (kg) 
Body Roll Inertia ( 
 
) 0.122 0.179 (kgm
2
) 
Tail Mass ( 
 
) 0.4 (kg) 
Tail Length ( 
 
) 0.5 (m) 
Distance to COM (a) 0.242 0.266 (m) 
Angle to COM ( ) 1.144 0.972 (rad) 
Tail distance to COM (b) 0.1 (m) 
 
 
Fig. 5. Second order force model fit for the braking force induced 
by the nylon line is shown with E = 24.7 and   = 2.82. The 
simulation model was initialised at a velocity of 4.5 m/s to match 
the experiment conditions. 
Now that the model has been satisfactorily defined, we 
are capable of designing the feedback control algorithms for 
the tail.  
B. Tail Controller Design 
As shown in Section II, when the LMT model 
experiences aggressive accelerations, it topples over. Hence, 
the motivation here is that if we employ the tail as an actuator 
for a pitch rate controller, we can counter this induced 
(disturbance) torque, and accelerate more aggressively. 
The Longitudinal Manoeuvre Model (LMT) is nonlinear 
and under actuated [25]. Based on previous work done by the 
authors for high-speed turning, we propose the following 
controller architecture illustrated in Fig. 6. 
Nonlinear 
Dynamics
?b 
State Feedback 
Controller
Nonlinear 
Mapping
PI Controller
0
?t 
?t 
+
+
+
-
High Bandwidth
Varying Bandwidth
v ?
tail
 
 
Fig. 6. Tail controller architecture implemented. 
The primary goal for the controller architecture is to 
regulate the pitch rate of the body. As illustrated in the initial 
simulations of Section II a steady state error occurred. Thus, 
a high-bandwidth PI (proportional + integral) controller was 
implemented to drive the pitch rate to zero and also to 
diminish any modelling inaccuracy. The gains selected are  
 
 
= 25 and  
 
= 8. 
Now, to map the controller’s output as a torque command 
to the tail, a Partial Feedback Linearization (PFL) [26] was 
considered. However, we augment the framework presented 
by the authors with the addition of a disturbance term,  , 
which is: 
 
  [
 
 
 
 
] 
 
  
(5) 
where  
 
 is either the acceleration force or the braking 
force acting on the contact point of the collective rigid body.  
This will encapsulate the disturbance force that the body 
experiences due to acceleration/braking.  
Furthermore this implies that if the actuated joint ( 
 
) is 
commanded such that: 
 
 
? 
  
? 
[   
 
 
  
  
( 
 
  
 
  )  
(6) 
where, the matrices  
? 
 ,  
 
 
  
  
,  
 
 and  
 
 are defined in 
[26], we then have: 
 
 
? 
    
(7) 
which is now a linear system. 
As observed in previous studies [14], when the tail 
reaches its angular limits, it has significant velocity, which 
can negate the stabilization that it just performed when it 
strikes the end stops. This constraint is especially important 
in this study as the robot only has 90° of actuation.  
In a similar manner to [14], we employ another controller, 
to decrease the velocity of the tail when reaching the end 
stops. Whereas the previous study employed a fixed gain 
controller relying on timescale separation, we varied the 
bandwidth of this “tail spring damper” as a function of the 
tail angle. Thus, the natural frequency scale factor of this tail 
damper was governed by: 
  
   
   
(   
 
)
 (8) 
where   are    are parameters to be chosen. The scale factor 
was then multiplied by the pitch rate controller’s bandwidth 
(5 rad/s). By pole placement, we can then set appropriate tail 
angle and velocity gains. 
796
  
 
Fig. 7: Simulation of the tailed robot performing a rapid deceleration at an initial velocity of 8 m/s. 
To select   and    for the system, numerical optimization 
is employed to minimize the cost function: 
 
  ∫    
? 
 
( )
 
 
 
       
? 
( 
 
) 
(9) 
Note that  
 
 is the simulation end time and that the 
weights were selected such that pitch rate damping was 
deemed more critical than end tail velocity. Matlab’s 
constrained optimization ‘fmincon’ was subsequently utilized 
to determine the optimal parameters for   and    by 
simulating the full control architecture at the maximum 
velocity of the car (~9 m/s).  
There was an evident compromise between the tail’s 
velocity at the end of its travel and its ability to stabilize the 
pitch rate. After several iterations of initial solution seeds, the 
values of        and        were chosen. This reduced 
the final tail velocity from 10 to 5 rad/s, while still providing 
sufficient pitch stabilization. 
C. Numerical validation 
The controllers were then simulated at various initial 
velocities to determine the maximum deceleration (peak 
value) which could be obtained. The conditions for the 
simulation terminating were the same as discussed in Section 
II.  
For the tailless version a maximum deceleration of 9 m/s
2 
was obtained at a velocity of 5 m/s. When attempting initial 
velocities greater than this, the robot would topple over. 
The model with the actuated tail achieved a peak 
deceleration of 23 m/s
2
 at a maximum velocity of 8 m/s. This 
did however result in an end tail velocity of ~10 rad/s, which 
could be detrimental during the experimental testing.  
Screenshots of the animation produced by the simulation are 
also shown in Fig. 7. 
V. RAPID ACCELERATION 
A. Force Model Identification 
The acceleration force was provided by a brushless DC 
motor (Traxxas Velineon) controlled by PWM. As with the 
braking, we will model this system as a force input 
disturbance. It is noted that we do have control of this as an 
input to the system, but to keep uniformity of the control 
architecture, we will assume it is an input disturbance. 
Simple step tests were performed on Dima to determine 
the model parameters. The force equation in the Laplace 
domain is given by: 
  
 
  
 
 
    
   
    
( 
  
  
 
 ?) (10)  
where  
 
,  
    
and  
 
 are model parameters and  
  
 is the 
voltage input produced by PWM. 
Data from a 40% throttle step was used and in a similar 
method, Matlab’s ‘lsqnonlin’ was employed to fit the 
parameter values. A comparison between the fit and the 
experimental data is depicted in Fig. 8. 
 
Fig. 8. Linear model fit for the acceleration produced by the 
brushless DC motor. The data was taken from a 40% throttle step. 
The oscillations are attributed to the uneven grass where the test 
occurred. 
B. Tail Controller Design 
If we consider the acceleration force to be a disturbance, 
then the same controller architecture can be employed for the 
acceleration manoeuvres as described in Section IV. 
C. Numerical validation 
 The models were then simulated by stepping the throttle 
to various values. The performance metric used was the peak 
acceleration experienced. 
The tail-less model obtained a maximum acceleration of 4 
m/s
2
 at a throttle input of 40%. Any greater steps caused it to 
pitch over. 
The model with an actuated tail obtained an acceleration 
of 10.8 m/s
2
 at throttle input of 90%. However, even with the 
tail damper discussed, the tail still had an end velocity of 8 
rad/s which could be detrimental during experimentation. 
VI. EXPERIMENTS 
 The tail controller algorithms were then field tested on the 
robot performing the braking and acceleration manoeuvres.  
The performance metric for both was the peak accelerations 
experienced.
797
  
 
 
Fig. 9. A rapid acceleration test (90% throttle step) with the tail controller is depicted. 
The test procedure for braking was as follows: 
? The robot would drive straight until attaining the 
predefined initial velocity 
? Then, simultaneously the arrestor system would 
engage and the robot’s motor would stop 
? The initial velocity was increased till toppling 
occurred 
 
For the rapid acceleration tests, the procedure was: 
? The throttle would be stepped to a constant value 
? Once the tail had reached the end stop, the 
throttle would be set to zero and the test ended. 
A. Results 
The results for the rapid deceleration are depicted in Fig. 
10. The maximum deceleration for the tailless model was 
9.9±0.81 m/s
2 
at an initial velocity of 4.5 m/s. The maximum 
deceleration for the model with the tail was 15.2±0.89 m/s
2
 at 
a velocity of 6.5 m/s. 
 
Fig. 10. Comparative rapid deceleration data for the robot with and 
without the tail. 
The results for the rapid acceleration are depicted in Fig. 
9 and Fig. 11. The maximum acceleration for the tailless 
robot was 4.1±0.231 m/s
2
.The maximum acceleration for the 
robot with the tail was 6.1±0.198 m/s
2
. The reader is also 
encouraged to view the attached video comparison (see 
supplementary material). 
VII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The tailed robot produced ~50% more acceleration in 
both test scenarios than the tailless version. But these were 
still less than those predicted by the simulations.  
 
Fig. 11. Comparative experimental data for the acceleration 
manoeuvre for the tailed and the tailless robot. 
For the acceleration tests, this is attributed to the robot’s 
motor controller current limiter as the step tests from 70 to 
100% throttle all produced the same accelerations.  
However, the chief reason for the difference in both 
manoeuvres is the tail’s end velocity. When attempting more 
aggressive manoeuvres (braking or accelerating), the tail 
often struck the end stops with enough velocity to induce a 
flipping motion. This collision was not accounted for in 
simulation. 
Nevertheless, this study has provided valuable insights for 
future research. What is evident is that for the cheetah (or a 
future robot) to optimally use a tail for these tasks, it would 
need to coordinate the force and the tail trajectories. This 
would ensure that the tail actuation limits are adhered to, 
while simultaneously maximising acceleration. Additionally, 
the cheetah’s tail is compliant which means it will absorb any 
impacts with the body or ground during manoeuvres. 
Based on these conclusions possible future robotic 
implementations should investigate the use of a MIMO 
optimal controller for manoeuvring using a tail [27] or the 
design of a compliant (semi-rigid) tail. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to gratefully acknowledge Callen 
Fisher and Javaad Patel for their support during testing and 
the Cheetah Outreach centre. Also, Prof. Ed Boje for advice 
and contributions to the controller design. 
 
798
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  A. Wilson, J. Lowe, K. Roskilly, P. Hudson, K. Golabek and K. 
McNutt, “Locomotion dynamics of hunting in wild cheetahs,” Nature, 
vol. 498, pp. 185-189, 2013.  
[2]  P. W. Webb, “Maneuverability - General Issues,” IEEE Journal of 
Oceanic Engineering, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 547-555, 2004.  
[3]  D. Jindrich and M. Qiao, “Maneuvers during legged locomotion,” 
Chaos, vol. 19, 2009.  
[4]  R. M. Alexander, Principles of Animal Locomotion, Princeton 
University Press, 2006.  
[5]  S. Williams, H. T, U. J.R, Wilson and A.M, “Pitch then power: 
Limitations to acceleration in quadrupeds,” Biology Letters, vol. 5, pp. 
610-613, 2009.  
[6]  A. Jusufi, D. Kawano, T. Libby and R. Full, “Righting and Turning in 
mid-air using appendage inertia: Reptile tails, analytical models and 
bio-inspired robots,” Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, vol. 5, pp. 1-12, 
2010.  
[7]  C. Walker, V. C and L. Ritz, “Balance in the cat: role of the tail and 
effects of sacrocaudal transection,” Behavioural Brain Research, vol. 
91, no. 1, pp. 41-47, 1998.  
[8]  E. Chang-Siu, T. Libby, M. Tomizuka and F. R.J, “A Lizard-Inspired 
Active Tail Enables Rapid Maneuvers and Dynamic Stabilization in a 
Terrestrial Robot,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems, San Francisco, California, 2011.  
[9]  A. Johnson, T. Libby and E. Chang-Siu, “Tail Assisted Dynamic Self 
Righting,” in Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Conference on 
Climbing and Walking Robots and the Support Technologies for 
Mobile Machines, Baltimore, MD, USA, 2012.  
[10]  E. Chang-Siu, T. Libby, M. Brown, R. Full and M. Tomizuka, “A 
nonlinear feedback controller for aerial self-righting by a tailed robot,” 
in International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
Karlsruhe, 2013.  
[11]  R. Briggs, J. Lee, M. Haberland and S. Kim, “Tails in Biomimetic 
Design: Analysis, Simulation and Experiment,” in IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 
Vilamoura, Algarve, Portugal, 2012.  
[12]  N. Kohut, D. Haldane, D. Zarrouk and R. Fearing, “Effect of Inertial 
Tail on Yaw Rate of 45 gram Legged Robot,” in Proceedings of the 
Fifteenth International Conference on Climbing and Walking Robots 
and the Support Technlogies for Mobile Machines, Baltimore, MD, 
USA, 2012.  
[13]  N. Kohut, A. Pullin, D. Haldane, D. Zarrouk and R. Fearing, “Precise 
Dynamic Turning of a 10 cm Legged Robot on a Low Friction,” in 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
Karlsruhe, 2013.  
[14]  A. Patel and M. Braae, “Rapid Turning at High-Speed: Inspirations 
from the Cheetah’s Tail,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Tokyo, 2013.  
[15]  A. Patel and M. Braae, “An Actuated Tail Increases Rapid 
Acceleration Manoeuvres in Quadruped Robots,” in International 
Joint Conferences on Computer, Information, Systems Sciences and 
Engineering, 2012.  
[16]  R. Full and D. Koditschek, “Templates and Anchors: Neuromechanical 
hypotheses of legged locomotion on land,” Journal of Experimental 
Biology, vol. 202, no. 23, pp. 3325-3332, 1999.  
[17]  P. Holmes, R. Full, D. Koditschek and J. Guckenheimer, “The 
dynamics of legged locomotion: Models, analysis and challenges,” 
SIAM Rev., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 206-304, 2006.  
[18]  J. Lee, S. Sponberg, O. Loh, G. Lamperski, R. Full and N. Cowan, 
“Templates and Anchors for Antenna-Based Wall Following in 
Cockroaches and Robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 24, no. 
1, pp. 130-143, 2008.  
[19]  S. Williams, J. Usherwood, K. Jespers, A. Channon and A. Wilson, 
“Exploring the mechanical basis for acceleration: Pelvic limb 
locomotor function during accelerations in racing greyhounds (Canis 
familiaris),” The Journal of Experimental Biology, vol. 212, pp. 550-
565, 2009.  
[20]  D. Greenwood, Advanced Dynamics, Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2003.  
[21]  R. Murray, Z. Li and S. Sastry, A Mathematical Introduction to 
Robotic Manipulation, CRC Press, 1994.  
[22]  P. Hudson, S. Corr and A. Wilson, “High speed galloping in the 
cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus) and the racing greyhound (Canis 
familiaris): spatio-temporal and kinetic characteristics.,” Journal of 
Experimental Biology, vol. 215, no. 14, pp. 2425-2434, 2012.  
[23]  L. Marker and A. Dickman, “Morphology, Physical Condition and 
Growth of the Cheetah (Acinonyx Jubatus),” Journal of Mamalogy, 
vol. 84, no. 3, pp. 840-850, 2003.  
[24]  F. Mainardi and G. Spada, “Creep, Relaxation and Viscosity Properties 
for Basic Fractional Models in Rheology,” The European Physical 
Journal, Special Topics, vol. 193, pp. 133-160, 2011.  
[25]  R. Tedrake, “Fully Actuated vs. Underactuated Systems (Course 
Notes),” MIT OpenCourseWare, 2009. 
[26]  A. Shkolnik and R. Tedrake, “High-Dimensional Underactuated 
Motion Planning via Task Space Control,” in IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2008.  
[27]  D. Kirk, Optimal Control Theory: An Introduction, Mineola, New 
York: Dover Publications, 2004.  
 
 
799
