Ultrapiano:
A Novel Human-Machine Interface Applied to Virtual Reality
Mikel Sagardia, Katharina Hertkorn, David Sierra Gonz« alez, and Claudio Castellini
In the quest for better human-machine interfaces (HMIs)
for teleoperation and virtual reality, we hereby present the
Þrst integrated application of medical ultrasound imaging to
remotely control a virtual piano playing environment in real-
time.
A successful interaction with the remote environment is
crucial for teleoperation systems. Thus, detecting human
Þnger motions and forces plays an important role in pre-
serving Þne manipulation capabilities and hand dexterity.
Standard kinematic devices, such as the CyberGlove, provide
an accurate measurement assuming the glove being perfectly
adherent to the subjectÕs skin. Problems like intrinsic elas-
ticity of the glove and different shapes of human hands limit
their capabilities. Optical motion tracking systems, such as
the Vicon system, allow for maximum freedom of motion
(provided that markers are correctly set on the hand) but
are prone to occlusion. Both kinds of systems need a long
calibration procedure until the setup is ready to use.
We present medical ultrasound imaging as an accurate
way of detecting human Þnger motions [1]. Recently, it has
been shown that this technology can work in real-time and
necessitates a short and easy calibration procedure [2]. In
particular, Þnger forces can be individually predicted using
forearm cross section ultrasound images. These forces are
obtained in reference to the maximum stress applied during
the calibration. The only sensor needed during the process is
the ultrasound probe, which can be Þxed on the ventral side
of the forearm. This leaves the subjectÕs hand completely
free to operate.
We use this novel HMI to control piano playing in a virtual
reality environment. Our virtual reality framework consists
of a fast collision detection combined with a physics engine,
the visualization tool InstantPlayer [3], and a sound player
controlled by the collision forces. The collision detection is
based on the V oxmap-Pointshell Algorithm [4], [5], which
is suitable for haptic rendering since it computes collision
forces within 1ms. The physics engine Bullet [6] is used
to solve the motion equations under constraints. The com-
bination of this physics engine with our collision detection
framework enables realistic interaction with several complex
virtual objects at haptic update rates.
Our integrated system can be used as an entertainment
device, for rehabilitation of an impaired hand (e.g., in case
of a stroke or of neuromuscular condition) and to aid the
recovery from phantom-limb pain for amputees, along the
All authors are with the Robotics and Mechatronics
Center, German Aerospace Center (DLR), Wessling, Germany.
ffirstname.lastnameg@dlr.de
Fig. 1. The ultrapiano setup has four main components: an ultrasound
machine and probe capturing images of the forearm, a Þnger force prediction
system, a magnetic tracker to detect the hand movement and a realistic
virtual environment.
lines of mirror therapy [7], [8].
Future work includes studying the interaction of the dif-
ferent Þngers in order to be able to detect multi-Þngered
forces. The system is as well being optimized to reduce the
total delay between the action of the subject and the response
of the VR environment (currently around 300ms).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Castellini, G. Passig, and E. Zarka, ÒUsing ultrasound images of
the forearm to predict Þnger positions,Ó IEEE Transactions on Neural
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 788Ð797,
2012.
[2] D. Sierra Gonz« alez and C. Castellini, ÒA realistic implementation
of ultrasound imaging as a human-machine interface for upper-limb
amputees,Ó Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 2013, to appear.
[3] J. Behr, P. D¬ ahne, Y . Jung, and S. Webel, ÒBeyond the web browser -
x3d and immersive vr,Ó in Proc. of IEEE Symp. on 3D User Interfaces,
2007.
[4] W. A. McNeely, K. D. Puterbaugh, and J. J. Troy, ÒV oxel-based 6-dof
haptic rendering improvements,Ó Haptics-e: The Electronic Journal of
Haptics Research, vol. 3, 2006.
[5] M. Sagardia and T. Hulin, ÒFast and accurate distance, penetration,
and collision queries using point-sphere trees and distance Þelds,Ó in
SIGGRAPH Posters, 2013, p. 83.
[6] ÒBullet,Ó 2013, accessed September 11th, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://bulletphysics.org/
[7] V . S. Ramachandran, D. Rogers-Ramachandran, and S. Cobb, ÒTouch-
ing the phantom limb,Ó Nature, vol. 377, no. 6549, pp. 489Ð490, 1995.
[8] B. L. Chan, R. Witt, A. P. Charrow, A. Magee, R. Howard,
P. F. Pasquina, K. M. Heilman, and J. W. Tsao, ÒMirror therapy
for phantom limb pain,Ó New England Journal of Medicine,
vol. 357, no. 21, pp. 2206Ð2207, 2007. [Online]. Available:
http://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc071927
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2089
