A Chase-Game to Teach Children on a Robot to Follow Moving Objects
Jiyeon Kang
1
, Samuel Logan
3
, James C. Galloway
3
and Sunil K. Agrawal
2
Abstract—Due to lack of mobility, children are limited in
theirinteractionwithothers.Thislackofinteractionwithpeers
leads to emotional problems in children with special needs,
behavior disorders, and social maladjustment. These social
problems continue even when these children become adults.
Hence, it is important to promote social skills at a very early
age. In this study, we suggest a new training paradigm for
young infants and toddlers seated on mobile robots, using force
feedback joystick, to bring them closer to their peers so that
it can facilitate interaction. Four healthy children participated
in a game as they chase a caregiver. A haptic force feedback
strategy teaches how to follow the caregiver. The force feedback
guidance strategy is tested as a training tool to bring the
children in close proximity to their peers.
I. INTRODUCTION
The lack of mobility in special needs children results in
other delays in their development milestones. The walking
and crawling in children leads to the development of
cognition, perception, and socialization [1], [2]. Studies
show that there is smaller social interaction between
children with special needs and their typically developing
peers in class rooms, gymnasium, or playground [3], [4].
This lack of social experience causes emotional depression,
maladjustment in classrooms, and behavioral disorders
[5]. Toddler and preschool age is a crucial period to
acquire social skills [6]. Previous research has shown that
intervention in these age groups beneﬁts children with low
social interaction [7], [8] and also reduces their offensive
behavior [9]. Difﬁculties in social interaction in preschool
carries over to elementary school [10]–[12]. Repeated
rejections from the peers in the early childhood may lead to
early interaction difﬁculties [13] and difﬁculty in learning
social behaviors at a later time. Early development or
intervention of social skills can reduce the risk of rejection
from the future peers.
One of the reasons for the delay in social development of
the children with low mobility is their lack of close proximity
to their peers. Smart wheel chair technology has evolved
over the years for automatic obstacle avoidance, shared
control, and path planning [14]–[16]. These developments
*This work was supported by NSF Award No. BCS-1252876
1
Jiyeon Kang is a Ph.D. student in the Department of Mechani-
cal Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 U.S.A. e-
mail:jk3623@columbia.edu
2
Sunil K. Agrawal, Ph.D. is a Professor of Mechanical Engineering and
of Rehabilitation and Regenerative Medicine at Columbia University, New
York, NY 10027 U.S.A. e-mail:sunil.agrawal@columbia.edu
3
Samuel Logan and James C. Galloway are with the Department of
Physical Therapy, University of Delaware, Newark, DE 19716 U.S.A. e-
mail: samlogan@udel.edu; jacgallo@udel.edu
*This paper includes a supplementary video clip.
in the ﬁeld can be used to detect obstacles and modify
wheelchair trajectory to avoid collisions in the environment
[17]. In our previous studies, smart wheel chairs were
provided to children with special needs and the interactions
of these children with their peers was observed. We noticed
that even though the children gained mobility with the smart
wheel chair, their interaction with their peers and teachers
still remained modest [18], [19]. We concluded that novel
forms of intervention is needed that can foster a child with
special needs to be closer to their peers in order to facilitate
socialization.
In our previous studies, we showed that training with a
force feedback joystick can facilitate children to learn higher
level navigation skills such as tracking paths with turns
and avoiding obstacles [20], [21]. The underlying training
strategy proposed in current work is assist-as-needed force
ﬁeld, where the hand feels a virtual force if the child moves
the joystick away from a target direction. This approach
enables the child to learn directed movement to a given
goal as it changes over time. If the goal is set as a moving
member in the peer group, the child can continuously follow
the peer group member. This paper presents a pilot study to
evaluate the feasibility and effectiveness of this strategy.
In this pilot study, a chase game is designed with the
following considerations. First, in this game, a chaser should
tag the other child to win the game. The force feedback
guidance is used within the game to promote directional
movements towards the peer. Second, the game involves a
social structure and rule [22]. A child is assigned to be the
chaser and is urged to catch another child or a caregiver
who is running away. This role can result in the children
to interact with others unconsciously. Third, this game is
simple and is easy to explain to the participants. We found
that all children enjoyed to participate in this experiment.
We feel that this experiment involving a chase game can
be an effective test bed for social skills training of children
with mobility impairments.
II. HARDWARE SET UP
The set up in this study consists of a mobile robot, a
lidar scanner, and a force feedback joystick as seen in the
Fig. 1. The lidar scanner was placed on the robot to detect
obstacles and map the space around the robot. A Ubisense
3D Indoor Positioning System (IPS) was used to identify
the position of a tag attached to the robot as well as to a
moving goal. Four IPS receivers were mounted on the walls
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 234
Child Joystick
Lidar
Mobile
Robot
Command
Force feedback
Ubisense
Position
Fig. 1. A schematic of the experimental set up with the robotic wheel
chair
of a gymnasium of an Early Learning Center where these
experiments were conducted. Encoder data was added to the
IPS position data of the robot to ensure accuracy of 0.15 m
with a properly designed Kalman ﬁlter [23].
A reference path is needed to guide the child driving the
robot towards a caregiver. Before building this reference
path, the environment should be mapped for the presence
of obstacles. A certainty grid map is used for recording
static or slow moving obstacles with rectangular grids [24].
The space is divided into 10 x 10 cm grids and nodes
on the grid are checked with the lidar scanner to update
the occupancy. This certainty grid map is a powerful tool
for sensor fusion with sensor uncertainties. Trajectory
planning is essential to move the robot towards a given
goal. Many numerical algorithms have been presented to
build a trajectory between start and goal points [25]–[27].
As we explored the environment using the certainty grid
map, grid based algorithm was chosen to build a new
trajectory between the robot and the caregiver. A* is a
typical grid based algorithm which results in an array of
nodes with the best cost among the candidate nodes [26].
For the initial set up of each node, the largest obstacle
free square is investigated and the distance from the parent
node is assigned as the cost. The trajectory planning for
our child drivers includes many challenging problems.
First, fast planning time is needed, since children become
TABLE I
SWITCHING STRATEGY FOR REPLANNING A NEW PATH
Algorithmn: Switching strategy
1: if inside the current square then
2: if the current square is not the ﬁnal goal then
3: if the next goal is not blocked then
4: Move on to the next goal and return it
5: else
6: Replan a path with A* algoritghm
7: end if
8: else
9: Return the current goal
10: end if
11: else
12: if the robot is inside the previous square then
13: Return the current goal
14: else
15: Replan a path with A* algorithm
16: end if
17: end if
impatient very soon. Second, the other children are moving
around the robot with different speeds. Also, the caregiver
labeled as the goal is continuously moving around playing
with the other children. To overcome these challenges, a
switching strategy from Pathak [28] is integrated with the
A* algorithm. This switching strategy in Table I classiﬁes
the cases for re-planning, depending on the position of the
robot and obstacles. It enables to build an obstacle free
trajectory toward the moving goal autonomously.
The resultant nodes of the A* algorithm are used as the
intermediate goals for the potential ﬁeld controller to ﬁnd the
appropriate velocity input of the robot. Every node has an
obstacle free square assigned from the initializing process
of the A* algorithm. Inside this square, the desired linear
and angular velocity towards the current intermediate goal
is computed through the potential ﬁeld controller [20]. The
desired linear velocityv and angular velocityw are computed
as follows.

v
w

= (K
1
B
T
+K
2
F)rU
where
K
1
=

k
1
0
0 k
1

;K
2
=

k
2
0
0 k
2

k
1
;k
2
>0
B
T
=

cos sin 0
0 0 1

;F=

0 0 0
 sin cos 1

rU =

@U
@x
@U
@y
0

;U =U
a
+U
r
(x;y) is the robot position and  is the orientation of robot.
k
1
and k
2
are positive constants. U
a
denotes the attractive
potential toward the goal and U
r
is the repulsive potential
which exerts force to avoid the obstacles. Two different
potentials are deﬁned as [29]:
U
a
=
1
2
k
a
[(x x
g
)
2
+(y y
g
)
2
]
U
r
=

1
2
k
r
(
1

 
1
0
)
2
if 
0
0 if >
0
where (x
g
;y
g
) is the intermediate goal that is computed by
switching strategy in table I. 
0
is a constant, deﬁned as
the radius of inﬂuence from the obstcle,  is the minium
distance between obstacle and robot.k
a
andk
r
are constants.
The force feedback haptic device mounted on the robot has
two different functions. The subject can give a velocity input
to the robot and get a force guidance from the joystick. The
“assist-as-needed” idea with force tunnel is implemented to
decide the direction and amount of the guided force. “Assist-
as-needed” paradigm is widely used in training studies and
has shown positive results with adults and children [20], [30],
[31]. As the subject’s hand goes further from the desired
direction, it is guided with larger force towards the desired
direction.
The linear and rotational input velocity from the subject
235
Target
direction
Centering effect
Virtual Wall
Region b2
Virtual Wall
X
Y
Region c
Region b1
?
Fig. 2. The effect of the joystick force feedback with the target direction
seen from above
is mapped on the x-y plane of the joystick. If the driver
moves the joystick towards the front or back along the y
axis (Fig. 2), the joystick gives a pure translational command
to the robot. However, if the joystick is moved along the
x axis, pure rotational movement is given to the robot.
The force feedback has three different effects depending on
the direction of the joystick. Before discussing these three
regions, the targeted tunnel direction toward the intermediate
goal should be deﬁned with the velocity given from the
potential ﬁeld controller [21]. The targeted direction angle
 yields
 = arctan(
v
v
max
=
w
w
max
) (1)
The ﬁrst region (Region a) is a cone including the targeted
direction where there is no force guidance. If the child
pushes the joystick into this region, the child can move
towards the intermediate goal. Next region (Region b1 and
b2) corresponds to the force tunnel wall where the joystick
pushes the hand of the child toward the targeted direction.
The last Region c applies a restoring force on the childs hand
to bring the joystick back to the center [20].
Fig. 3. The robot driver chasing the moving caregiver during the training
trial
Obstacle
5m
5m
A B
C
D
Fig. 4. The task area with the obstacles
III. PROTOCOL
Designing an experiment with children as subjects needs
more care than adults. The age of the child should be
appropriately chosen so that they can understand the given
task. Additionally, the attention time for a task differs largely
based on the age. Three additional factors are considered:
First, intermittent verbal instruction should be given to
encourage the child to focus on the experiment. Fun is an
important factor that prevents the child from relinquishing
the experiment. Gaming factor of the experiment makes
the children enjoy it and also motivates other subjects
to participate in the experiment. Rewards between the
experiment trials are set up to increase the motivation of
the child. Verbal reinforcement and positive feedback were
used to increase intrinsic motivation [32], since material
reinforcers such as candy, token and small toy are able to
distract children from concentration on the task [33].
A chase game was set up to test the feasibility of
this experiment within a 5 x 5 m area, as shown in Fig.
4. The caregiver had an Ubisense IPS tag attached to
the body and verbal direction was given to the child
to catch the caregiver. A paper stick was given to the
child as an extension of the arm to catch the caregiver,
since the front of the robot extends beyond the arm
length of the child. Four healthy children participated in
this experiment with an average age of 2.3 years. Two
children were randomly chosen for the experimental group
who were trained with the force feedback joystick, and
the remaining two children were assigned to the control
group. The experimental protocol was approved by the
Institutional Review Board of University of Delaware and
the consent forms were signed by the parents of the children.
The experiment consists of evalutation and training
sessions. First, to measure the effect of the training, the
236
Obstacle
A B
C D
Obstacle
A B
C D
Obstacle
B
C D
Obstacle
B
C D
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. The task conﬁguration. (a) Pre(post) session: caregiver moves along
the rectangle track. (b)Training session: caregiver moves randomly within
the rectangular area
evaluation sessions are conducted without enabling the force
feedback in the joystick. An evaluation session is conducted
before and after the training session: two pre-training and
two post-training (Fig. 6). Then, these data from pre-
and post-trainings are compared to check the effect of
the session. Second, in the training sessions conducted in
between the above evaluation trials, the force feedback is
provided from the joystick of the robot to the hand of the
children in order to guide them towards the caregiver. The
training session constitutes four training trials as indicated in
Fig. 6. Each trial in the evaluation and training session lasts
for 40 seconds and all eight trials are conducted in a single
day. In the evaluation session, the caregiver is instructed to
move along the pre-determined trajectory with a constant
velocity as shown in Fig. 5(a). Unlike the evaluation session,
in the training session, the caregiver is instructed to run
away randomly from the robot with the child driving it in a
real chase game. The following describes further details of
the evaluation and training sessions.
- Evaluation session: The caregiver is asked to move along
the edge of a 5 x 5 m area (Fig. 5(a)). Before the experiment,
the caregiver is trained to move with a constant speed to be
consistent in all evaluation trials. The caregiver stands one
meter away from the child at the starting point which is
switched from point A(D) to D(A) at each trial to evaluate
right and left turns equivalently. The child is driving on the
robot without the force feedback from the joystick during
Session Evaluation Training Evaluation
Trial 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Testing set B B T T T T P P
Task track Fixed Random Fixed
Joystick
Force
Feedback
Experi-
mental
x x 0 0 0 0 x x
Control x x x x x x x x
B Base line T Training P Post training
Fig. 6. Protocol for the experiment. The experiment consists of evaluation
and training sessions. Evaluation session constitutes pre- and post-training
trials.
the session.
- Training session: The caregiver moves randomly
between the obstacles in a 5 x 5 m square in order
to train the child to chase a randomly moving object.
Additionally, the caregiver is instructed to be in the range
where the caregiver can make eye-contact with the child
and encourage him/her to follow the caregiver. After 40
seconds of the session, the caregiver pretends to be caught
by the child. In this session, the force feedback is provided
to the child to move the joystick toward the desired direction.
According to Ruff [34], the focused attention of 2.5
year old children lasts for about 16 seconds. However, our
experiment lasts for 40 seconds which is nearly three times
longer than the typical attention span of the children. In
order to keep the attention of the children, rewards are given
whenever the child touches the caregiver with the paper
stick. As a reward, the caregiver makes a funny face and
“high ﬁve” with the child for encouragement. Moreover, in
the middle of trials, the caregiver gives verbal motivation to
the child if he/she is not focused on the training.
For the evaluation, the distance between the robot and
caregiver is measured. Also, the input data of the joystick
is recorded with respect tox andy coordinates which shows
the directional manipulation ability of the children.
IV. RESULT
Fig. 7 shows the average distance between the robot
and caregiver for each child in control and experimental
group. The distance is averaged for 40 seconds and two
evaluation trials for each pre and post-training are also
averaged to observe the overall trends. The average distance
presents how well the child is able to chase the caregiver
with directional manipulation of the joystick. Two children
in the experimental group show more than 35 % decrease
of the distance between pre and post training sessions.
Experimental1 Experimental2 Control1 Control2
0
1
2
3
4
5
Average Distance (m)
Subject
 Pre
 Post
Fig. 7. Average distance between the caregiver and child for children in
experimental and control groups
237
Experimental1 Experimental2 Control1 Control2
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
Joystick Directional Input (%)
Subject
 Pre
 Post
Fig. 8. Joystick rotational input percentage for children in experimental
and control groups
However, the children in the control group, without the
guidance of the force feedback, were found to show low
rate of improvement after the same training time with the
children in the experimental group. Instead, the children
in the control group were observed to make inefﬁcient
forward and backward movements resulting in increase of
the distance to the caregiver, which differs clearly from the
children in the experimental group with the force feedback.
The second graph shows the input data of the joystick for
directional manipulation from each child. As described in
the session II (hardware set up),x coordinate of the joystick
corresponds to the angular motion of the mobile robot.
At the start of the experiment (pre-training), the children
rarely try to move the joystick to the left or the right. They
perceived the joystick of the robot as simple pulling or
pushing device to make the robot move, even though the
joystick can be controlled in any direction within its 360
o
range. After the training sessions with the force feedback,
the children in the experimental group learned to perform
the rotational movement with the help of the force feedback.
This fact is supported by results in Fig. 8 - the joystick
input data for the rotational movement of the children in
the experiment group showed deﬁnite increases compared
to that of the control group. The increased value of the
joystick input data indicates that the children learned well
the directional manipulation of the joystick to the left and
the right for rotation of the robot.
Even though the number of subject is small, the resulting
trends in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 are quite striking and provide
valuable insights into larger studies in future. As the children
in the experiment group have the force feedback during the
trial session, they show better performance to track a moving
goal with directional changes.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The driving performance of the children with force
feedback showed distinct improvements compared to
those with conventional joystick. This can be explained
as follows: First, the force feedback informs the children
that the joystick can be moved along all directions. At the
beginning of the experiment, none of the children tried to
move the joystick to the left or the right to get rotational
movement. However after experiencing the force feedback,
they become more skillful at it. Second, the force feedback
guides continuously in which direction they should move.
It is supported by the fact that the distance between the
caregiver and driver decreases with the help of the force
feedback.
Force feedback was also shown in other studies as a
powerful tool to enhance skills for manipulating systems, in
medical surgery, or in tele-operated robots [35]–[38]. The
effects of the force feedback as a rehabilitation tool have
been presented for CP, stroke, and other motor impaired
patients [39]–[41]. The force feedback is more intuitive
and continuous than visual or auditory feedback. As the
child holds the joystick, the feedback is sustained during
the whole driving period. From our experiments, this haptic
sensory feedback shows promise to train children to move
towards their peers. This will provide more opportunity to
children to interact with others and is a ﬁrst step towards
socialization.
Future work of our study is to extend the experiments
to children with special needs. The chase game experiment
will foster children with special needs to play with normal
children and interact socially with others. Also, we want to
evaluate the social skills of the children quantitatively and
show the merits of the force feedback in social training. For
example, PEDI (Pediatric Evaluation of Disability Inventory)
[42] score can be used as a clinical measurement tool, LAQ-
CP (Lifestyle Assessment Questionnaire) [43] and PedsQL
(Pediatric Quality of Life Inventory) [44] can assess social
activity of the children with special needs. Many teachers and
care givers put a lot of time and energy to bring special needs
and healthy children together in a class room. We believe
that this mobile robot with haptic fedback will provide a
new paradigm that will allow children to communicate and
play together and help caregivers and classroom teachers in
a seamless way in the future.
REFERENCES
[1] J. J. Campos, D. I. Anderson, M. A. Barbu-Roth, E. M. Hubbard,
M. J. Hertenstein, and D. Witherington, “Travel broadens the mind,”
Infancy, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 149–219, 2000.
[2] D. I. Anderson, J. J. Campos, D. E. Anderson, T. D. Thomas, D. C.
Witherington, I. Uchiyama, and M. A. Barbu-Roth, “The ﬂip side of
perception–action coupling: Locomotor experience and the ontogeny
of visual–postural coupling,” Human movement science, vol. 20, no. 4,
pp. 461–487, 2001.
[3] F. M. Gresham, “Social skills training with handicapped children: A
review,” Review of Educational Research, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 139–176,
1981.
[4] D. Feitelson, S. Weintraub, and O. Michaeli, “Social interactions in
heterogeneous preschools in israel,” Child Development, pp. 1249–
1259, 1972.
238
[5] G. Ladd and S. Asher, “Social skill training and children’s peer
relations,” Handbook of social skills training and research, pp. 219–
244, 1985.
[6] J. Mize and G. W. Ladd, “A cognitive-social learning approach to so-
cial skill training with low-status preschool children.” Developmental
Psychology, vol. 26, no. 3, p. 388, 1990.
[7] M. R. Yarrow, P. M. Scott, and C. Z. Waxler, “Learning concern for
others.” Developmental Psychology, vol. 8, no. 2, p. 240, 1973.
[8] R. D. O’Connor, “Modiﬁcation of social withdrawal through symbolic
modeling1,” Journal of Applied Behavior Analysis, vol. 2, no. 1, pp.
15–22, 1969.
[9] S. Zahavi and S. R. Asher, “The effect of verbal instructions on
preschool children’s aggressive behavior,” Journal of School Psychol-
ogy, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 146–153, 1978.
[10] G. W. Ladd and J. M. Price, “Predicting children’s social and school
adjustment following the transition from preschool to kindergarten,”
Child development, pp. 1168–1189, 1987.
[11] D. Van Alstyne and L. A. Hattwick, “A follow-up study of the behavior
of nursery school children,” Child Development, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 43–
72, 1939.
[12] M. F. Waldrop and C. F. Halverson Jr, “Intensive and extensive peer
behavior: Longitudinal and cross-sectional analyses,” Child Develop-
ment, pp. 19–26, 1975.
[13] N. Eisenberg-Berg, E. Cameron, K. Tryon, and R. Dodez, “Socializa-
tion of prosocial behavior in the preschool classroom.” Developmental
Psychology, vol. 17, no. 6, p. 773, 1981.
[14] R. C. Simpson, D. Poirot, and F. Baxter, “The hephaestus smart
wheelchair system,” Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 118–122, 2002.
[15] S. P. Parikh, V . Grassi Jr, V . Kumar, and J. Okamoto Jr, “Incorporating
user inputs in motion planning for a smart wheelchair,” inRoboticsand
Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA’04. 2004 IEEE International
Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2043–2048.
[16] L. Montesano, M. D´ ıaz, S. Bhaskar, and J. Minguez, “Towards an
intelligent wheelchair system for users with cerebral palsy,” Neu-
ral Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 193–202, 2010.
[17] N. I. Katevas, N. Sgouros, S. Tzafestas, G. Papakonstantinou, P. Beat-
tie, J. Bishop, P. Tsanakas, and D. Koutsouris, “The autonomous
mobile robot senario: a sensor aided intelligent navigation system
for powered wheelchairs,” Robotics & Automation Magazine, IEEE,
vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 60–70, 1997.
[18] C. Ragonesi, X. Chen, S. Agrawal, and J. C. Galloway, “Power
mobility and socialization in preschool: a case study of a child with
cerebral palsy,” Pediatric Physical Therapy, vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 322–
329, 2010.
[19] C. Ragonesi, X. Chen, S. K. Agrawal, and J. C. Galloway, “Power
mobility and socialization in preschool: Follow-up case study of a
child with cerebral palsy,” Pediatric Physical Therapy, vol. 23, no. 4,
pp. 399–406, 2011.
[20] S. K. Agrawal, X. Chen, C. Ragonesi, and J. C. Galloway, “A novel
haptic guidance for learning steering with application to special needs
children,” Haptics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 376–383,
2012.
[21] X. Chen, C. Ragonesi, J. C. Galloway, and S. K. Agrawal, “Training
toddlers seated on mobile robots to drive indoors amidst obstacles,”
Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 271–279, 2011.
[22] S. Reifel, Play and Culture Studies. Ablex Publishing Corporation,
1999.
[23] X. Chen, C. Rabonesi, J. C. Galloway, and S. K. Agrawal, “Design
of a robotic mobility system to promote socialization in children,”
in Rehabilitation on Robotics (ICORR), 2013 IEEE International
Conference on. IEEE, 2013, pp. 4797–4802.
[24] H. P. Moravec, “Sensor fusion in certainty grids for mobile robots,”
AI magazine, vol. 9, no. 2, p. 61, 1988.
[25] S. M. LaValle and J. J. Kuffner Jr, “Rapidly-exploring random trees:
Progress and prospects,” 2000.
[26] P. E. Hart, N. J. Nilsson, and B. Raphael, “A formal basis for the
heuristic determination of minimum cost paths,” Systems Science and
Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 100–107, 1968.
[27] J. Barraquand, B. Langlois, and J.-C. Latombe, “Numerical potential
ﬁeld techniques for robot path planning,” Systems, Man and Cyber-
netics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 224–241, 1992.
[28] K. Pathak and S. K. Agrawal, “An integrated path-planning and control
approach for nonholonomic unicycles using switched local potentials,”
Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1201–1208, 2005.
[29] J.-C. Latombe, ROBOT MOTION PLANNING. Springer, 1990.
[30] S. K. Banala, S. H. Kim, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, “Robot as-
sisted gait training with active leg exoskeleton (alex),” Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 17, no. 1,
pp. 2–8, 2009.
[31] L. M. Crespo and D. J. Reinkensmeyer, “Haptic guidance can enhance
motor learning of a steering task,” Journal of motor behavior, vol. 40,
no. 6, pp. 545–557, 2008.
[32] E. L. Deci, “Effects of externally mediated rewards on intrinsic
motivation.” Journal of personality and Social Psychology, vol. 18,
no. 1, p. 105, 1971.
[33] F. P. Hemry, “Effect of reinforcement conditions on a discrimination
learning task for impulsive versus reﬂective children,” Child Develop-
ment, pp. 657–660, 1973.
[34] H. A. Ruff and K. R. Lawson, “Development of sustained, focused
attention in young children during free play.” Developmental psychol-
ogy, vol. 26, no. 1, p. 85, 1990.
[35] S. K. Cho, H. Z. Jin, J. M. Lee, and B. Yao, “Teleoperation of a
mobile robot using a force-reﬂection joystick with sensing mechanism
of rotating magnetic ﬁeld,” Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions
on, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 17–26, 2010.
[36] F. J. Rubio-Sierra, R. W. Stark, S. Thalhammer, and W. M. Heckl,
“Force-feedback joystick as a low-cost haptic interface for an atomic-
force-microscopy nanomanipulator,” Applied Physics A, vol. 76, no. 6,
pp. 903–906, 2003.
[37] X. Wang, G. G. Seet, M. W. Lau, E. Low, and K. Tan, “Exploiting
force feedback in pilot training and control of an underwater robotics
vehicle: an implementation in labview,” in OCEANS 2000 MTS/IEEE
Conference and Exhibition, vol. 3. IEEE, 2000, pp. 2037–2042.
[38] V . Vuskovic, M. Kauer, G. Sz´ ekely, and M. Reidy, “Realistic force
feedback for virtual reality based diagnostic surgery simulators,” in
Robotics and Automation, 2000. Proceedings. ICRA’00. IEEE Inter-
national Conference on, vol. 2. IEEE, 2000, pp. 1592–1598.
[39] S. Agrawal, X. Chen, M. Kim, Y . Lee, H. Cho, and G. Park,
“Feasibility study of robot enhanced mobility in children with cerebral
palsy,” in Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012
4th IEEE RAS & EMBS International Conference on. IEEE, 2012,
pp. 1541–1548.
[40] D. Bourbonnais, S. Bilodeau, Y . Lepage, N. Beaudoin, D. Gravel, and
R. Forget, “Effect of force-feedback treatments in patients with chronic
motor deﬁcits after a stroke,” American journal of physical medicine
& rehabilitation, vol. 81, no. 12, pp. 890–897, 2002.
[41] R. F. Boian, J. E. Deutsch, C. S. Lee, G. C. Burdea, and J. Lewis,
“Haptic effects for virtual reality-based post-stroke rehabilitation,” in
Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems,
2003.HAPTICS2003. Proceedings.11thSymposiumon. IEEE, 2003,
pp. 247–253.
[42] S. M. Haley, W. J. Coster, L. H. Ludlow, J. T. Haltiwanger, and P. J.
Andrellos, Pediatric evaluation of disability inventory (PEDI). New
England Medical Center Hospital, Incorporated, and PEDI Research
Group, 1992.
[43] P. Mackie, E. Jessen, and S. Jarvis, “The lifestyle assessment ques-
tionnaire: an instrument to measure the impact of disability on the
lives of children with cerebral palsy and their families,” Child: care,
health and development, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 473–486, 1998.
[44] J. W. Varni, M. Seid, and P. S. Kurtin, “Pedsql 4.0: Reliability and
validity of the pediatric quality of life inventory version 4.0 generic
core scales in healthy and patient populations,” Medical care, vol. 39,
no. 8, pp. 800–812, 2001.
239
