 
 
 
? 
The ability of the robot to negotiate the terrain strongly 
depends on its morphology and control strategy. Wheeled 
morphology is extremely good on the flat terrain, and the 
legged morphology has great mobility on the rough terrain, as 
proved by the legged animals. Thus, as the terrain nowadays 
is highly mixed with natural rough terrain, artificial rough 
terrain (ex: stair, bumps, etc), and artificial flat terrain (ex: 
road), designing a good robotic platform which can operated 
on all three categories may be a good solution. In the last few 
decades researchers have come up with two different 
approaches to elevate robots’ adaption to the environment: 
one is to design special mechanisms to overcome uneven 
terrain, and the other is to focus on behavioral development of 
a given robot to adapt different situations. Both approaches 
exist, but only a few works tried to solve the problem from 
both aspects simultaneously.  
Previously, we had developed a leg-wheel transformable 
robot Quattroped, equipped with a special transformation 
mechanism which can transform wheeled morphology to 
legged morphology and vice versa [1]. We have demonstrated 
the functionality of both wheeled mode on flat terrain and 
legged mode on rough terrain, which adequately utilizes the 
right morphology to the given environment setting. However, 
executing the leg-wheel transformation requires the robot in 
its rest mode, so the original motion status has to be 
interrupted. This disadvantage may not be significant if the 
classification of the terrain is obvious (i.e., fewer operation 
numbers of leg-wheel transformation), but this may be a 
problem when the terrain is highly-mixed. Here, we report on 
a new version of the leg-wheel transformable robot 
TurboQuad as shown in Fig. 1, which is capable of in-situ 
leg-wheel transformation without interruption the original 
motion status. This feature is achieved by two novel setups on 
the robot: one is new leg-wheel mechanism and the other is 
new control architecture, which will be briefly described in 
the following paragraphs. 
Like Quattroped, each leg-wheel of TurboQuad has two 
degree-of-freedom, providing radial and rotational motions. 
Unlike the Quattroped where several extra motors are utilized 
for leg-wheel transformation, TurboQuad uses the same set of 
driving motors for leg-wheel transformation, by shifting the 
centers of the half-circle rims out of the same point. The new 
method significantly reduce the complexity of mechanism 
and associated mechatronic setup. More importantly, the 
driving motion and leg-wheel transforming motion can take 
place simultaneously.  
 
This work is supported by National Science Council (NSC), Taiwan, under 
contract 101-2221-E-002-024-. 
Authors are with Department of Mechanical Engineering, National 
Taiwan University (NTU), No.1 Roosevelt Rd. Sec.4, Taipei 106, Taiwan. 
(Corresponding email: peichunlin@ntu.edu.tw). 
Besides the new mechanism, the control strategy is also 
crucial for successful leg-wheel transformation on the robot, 
where a bio-inspired control structure based on the Central 
Pattern Generator (CPG) is adopted. Each unit CPG is 
construct based on a Hopf oscillator, and all of them are 
worked as a modified coupled oscillator network. The 
structure is composed by three layers. The bottom layer is 
behavior layer, in this layer the motors (muscles) take their 
actions by receiving trajectories signal (neuron signal) from 
the above layer. The middle layer is pattern generation layer 
(neuron system), and rhythmic trajectory signal is generated 
through coupled oscillator networks. The top layer is the 
commanding layer (brain), it provide high-level concepts like 
speed, steering, and gaits into parameter space for the middle 
layer. This control structure can instantly generate smooth 
and continuous trajectory, allowing the robot to have smooth 
transition between different gaits and modes. This 
bio-inspired control structure is therefore a frame for all kinds 
of behavior transformation. When the remote operate gives 
the command like speed adjustment or steering to the robot, it 
is transformed into the parameters such as duty factor, swing 
frequency, relative phase, leg-wheel weight, and steering 
angle for the middle layer. Then through unit CPGs in the 
middle layer with assist of Hopf bifurcation, smooth 
leg-wheel trajectory can then be generated. The coupled 
oscillator network allows four CPGs to generate different 
gaits by relative-phase control. Finally, the leg-wheel 
trajectories are sent to the motors for joint trajectory 
generation.  
As an initial demonstration, three modes are developed on 
the robot, including wheeled mode, legged trot mode, and 
legged walk mode. Two different legged modes are designed 
based on the observation of animals, which uses different 
gaits to achieve high efficiency, smooth motion on different 
environment settings. The video contains three main sections. 
The first section reports control system and mechanisms, and 
the second and third sections shows how TurboQuad uses 
different gaits to negotiate artificial and natural environment 
settings, respectively.  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. C. Chen, K. J. Huang, W. H. Chen, S. Y. Shen, C. H. Li, and P. C. Lin, 
"Quattroped: A Leg-Wheel Transformable Robot," IEEE/ASME 
Transactions on Mechatronics (T-MECH), May 2013, DOI 
10.1109/TMECH.2013.2253615 
TurboQuad: A Leg-Wheel Transformable Robot Using Bio-Inspired Control 
Wei-Hsi Chen, Hung-Sheng Lin, and Pei-Chun Lin 
 
Fig. 1. Photos of the robot TurboQuad 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2090
