 
 
 
? 
Abstract— The augmentation of human power and endurance 
by way of a power assisted exoskeleton could revolutionize 
rehabilitation, industry and the battlefield. The use of servo 
motors placed near limb joints results in a rotary motion of the 
human limb which adapts well to attaching the exoskeleton to 
the limb and to integrate limb movement.  Air muscles or 
pneumatics offers advantages over DC motors for instantaneous 
high thrust limb motion using light weight components and even 
soft and malleable exoskeletons. However these implementations 
mimic human muscle and apply forces longitudinally resulting in 
high compression forces on the longitudinal exoskeleton. In the 
rotary approach forces are applied perpendicularly so as to flex 
adjoining limbs. In this rotary case the device can be designed to 
be more easily attached and worn.  The work reported here 
describes the progress with a new type of exoskeleton and air 
muscle design based on a new approach to exoskeleton and air 
muscle layout that combines contractive actuation with rotary 
motion. The aim is to reduce the need for bulky exoskeleton 
members, share out forces over larger areas and thereby 
demonstrate strapless, comfortable and easy fitting footwear. 
The developed prototype is tested for augmenting a test subject’s 
explosive power and significantly reducing the metabolic cost of 
walking while carrying a heavy load.   
I. INTRODUCTION 
EVERAL exoskeleton robotic devices have been 
demonstrated both by commercial and academic 
researchers. The now commercially available devices [1] to 
[5] are available for rehabilitation and some quasi-military 
applications. These have been based on earlier academic 
research such as [7-11]. 
The designs have several distinguishing features that 
contribute to both the advantages and the disadvantages of 
each approach.  These features include the drive method, the 
skeleton, the mode of operation and the integration of the 
human user’s needs. 
For example the drive method for [1-3] is based primarily 
 
Manuscript received September 15, 2013.  
Dennis Majoe is the Technical Director at MA Systems and Control Ltd, 
Southampton, SO30 3DS, United Kingdom. (phone: +44 2380 470222; e-
mail: dennis.majoe@masystems.co.uk).  
Lars Widmer, is conducting his PhD at the ETH Zurich, sponsored by 
MA Systems and Control Ltd, he works in the Native Systems Group of the 
Computer Systems Department, Clausiusstrasse 59, 8092 Zurich, 
Switzerland (e-mail: lars.widmer@masystems.co.uk). 
 
on electric servo motors mounted near the human limb joints. 
These servos act to rotate the exoskeleton near the joints and 
rotate the limbs by driving forces acting perpendicular to the 
human bone. 
Whereas [4-6] are based on pneumatics or air muscle, in 
which case the drive method is a contraction force which pulls 
the limb or exoskeleton around a joint or pivot point. These 
two approaches result in different exoskeleton requirements.  
Contractive drives based on light weight fluid or air 
pneumatics can be designed to act at the point where forces 
are needed and result in light additions to the human limb. 
The heavier power generating apparatus, such as a 
compressor, can be placed at a more convenient remote 
region.  
Rotary mechanisms place the direct drive, heavy servo 
motors near the limb joints adding substantial weight to the 
human limb and the servo motors need strong structures to 
support them. Therefore, only systems, such as the XOS suit 
from Raytheon Sarcos [1], with a substantial exoskeleton, can 
carry heavy but powerful motors near the limb joints so as to 
provide the high levels of forces that expand the human 
capability. In contrast the HAL Suit [2], with smaller light 
weight servo motors can be designed into a more elegant and 
comfortable suit however this system cannot provide as 
powerful power assistive forces. 
Relocated drive systems have been designed based on 
Bowden cables [7]. However these can suffer from frictional 
losses and the cable support infrastructure adds to the overall 
weight.  
Contractive drives can act almost instantly delivering very 
high thrust and can be used to assist sudden actions such as 
jumping or jerking. Servo motors that can deliver high 
instantaneous torque are inherently heavy and their placement 
at limb joints contributes to the strength to weight problem, 
restricting the desired sudden limb action. 
However contractive drives have two major disadvantages 
over rotary drives. First contractive drives require two anchor 
points for each simulated muscle. This complicates the 
exoskeleton design raising design issues around whether these 
anchor points should be directly mapped to the human body 
or to some supporting exoskeleton. When attached to the 
human body, anchor points based on straps and adhesives are 
Power and Endurance for Comfortable Wearable Robotics  
Dennis Majoe and Lars Widmer 
S 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4811
 
 
 
very uncomfortable and only limited forces may be produced 
before the person is hurt. Secondly the contractive drive 
works by creating a longitudinal pressure across the limb joint 
connecting the two attached limbs. This pressure leads to a 
collapse in the relative angle between the limbs. To provide 
robotic power augmentation, a wearable device must add even 
more pressure on the human limb joint, something the human 
would not necessarily like or be able to withstand. Therefore, 
soft suits have limitations, and contractive drives need 
eventually to use hard exoskeletons for high power 
applications. 
In theory there is no difference to the observed movement 
involved when using a contractive or rotary drive to rotate 
two structures hinged at a pivot point. 
However in practice when a payload such as a human’s 
limbs need to be carried and moved by the hinged structure, 
the most comfortable arrangement appears to be when the 
resulting contact forces between the structure and the human 
limb are distributed across a larger surface and not at one 
point. 
The principle is similar to that of the kneeling chair [13], 
with which one can share out body weight between the 
buttocks and the shin area or any human harness or seating 
saddle. Better displacement of forces tends to result in a more 
comfortable feeling and the human can integrate it into their 
actions rather than resist its discomfort. 
Rotary drives accomplish this by generating forces 
perpendicular to payload limbs. Contractive drives generate 
forces parallel to the limbs which are then indirectly 
converted into comfortable rotation like forces. 
So although contractive drives are attractive for their power 
and low weight, a new approach is needed to apply them in a 
comfortable and high power manner. This is the key point of 
the research work presented here. 
Exoskeletons fall into what could be described as hard or 
soft categories. A hard exoskeleton, of which the XOS suit is 
an example, provides a great deal of mechanical support, 
providing load bearing structures for the limbs, the motors 
and the payload. The main problem with these types of hard 
suit is that they impede the normal gait of the user as they 
cannot mimic the multiple degrees of freedom of the human 
body that it encapsulates [14]. 
On the other hand soft suits have been proposed which 
essentially replace the hard exoskeleton with a variety of 
straps that hug the body. These straps blend with the body 
motion however they inherently displace forces to parts of the 
body which are not related, for example the hip is a primary 
anchor point even for muscle action around the calf muscle. 
For example in [6] the exosuit is designed to provide only 
50% assistive force and this was not achieved fully due to 
compliance. Although the soft suits have much less impact on 
natural gait, their role in high power assistive devices would 
appear to be limited. 
Up till now it would appear that if the objective is to 
significantly augment a human’s strength, then a hard 
exoskeleton is mandatory and this brings with it the problems 
mentioned. However in this research we hope to change this 
design approach by proposing an alternative approach that 
blends comfort with high forces. 
The final aspect that differentiates ongoing research in this 
field is the manner in which the design integrates the robotic 
aid with human motion. Some advances have been made in 
the integration of the intent of the user, by monitoring either 
the muscle driving nerves or the users brain, in order to 
determine when to drive the motor or pneumatics of the 
assistive device [10],[15].  
The overall aim of our work is to develop an exoskeleton 
and drive system which can reduce the metabolic cost of 
walking significantly while carrying a heavy load. An 
additional aim is to achieve this without impacting the 
comfort of the user because of soft suit straps and adhesives 
or degrading the gait of the user with a hard encapsulating 
frame.  In addition the design should lend itself to working 
synergistically with the user so that the user takes advantage 
of the robot, rather than directly controls it. 
This paper comprises section II describing the proposed 
new approach to exoskeleton design and actuation and how it 
may be used for different limb assistance problems. Section 
III describes Hubot, a lower leg assistive prototype built to 
test the concept. Section IV presents the tests performed to 
determine the effectiveness of the design approach and 
discusses the results of the test performed.  
II. PRINCIPLE OF OPERATION 
The human body typically has limbs as shown 
diagrammatically in figure 1a and 1b. 
A lower leg limb may be simplistically modeled as a 
skeletal bone support and calf muscle and shin muscle. The 
foot comprises a joint and ball of foot and a further set of 
joints towards the toes. The muscles are adhered to the 
skeleton by tendons and cartilage. The human movement of 
the foot is caused by the muscles 5 or 6 contracting and 
relaxing, pivoting the foot 2 around the joint 3. 
Similarly the torso 8 has hip joint 9 and lower thigh skeletal 
bone 10, with muscles groups adhering to the bone. The thigh 
is rotated by antagonistic action of the muscle groups 11 and 
12. 
In mimicking the human biology traditional approaches to 
4812
 
 
 
robotic assistive devices using contractive drives have relied 
upon the creation of a hard exoskeleton or a softer net of 
straps envelope the limbs and body providing sufficient 
structure that muscle like actuators may bring about forces to 
move the limbs. 
 
Fig. 1.  Figure 1a on the left shows a simple model of the human lower leg 
bone and muscles, 1b on the right shows the upper thigh jointed to the torso 
with primary thigh muscles. 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Figure 2 a on the left shows a simple model of a traditional 
contractively driven exoskeleton, figure 2b on the right shows the layout of 
the exoskeleton proposed in this new research work. 
 
A traditional approach is depicted in figure 2a. In order to 
drive with very high forces, one cannot use a soft suit as the 
straps and adhesives applied to the skin can cause discomfort, 
so a “hard” support member 17 must be introduced.  The 
exoskeleton consists of a base plate and a hinged vertical 
support where actuator 19 can cause the base plate 16 to 
rotate around 18 by pulling the attached rod vertically 
upwards. The strap 20 has two important roles. Its first role is 
to keep the structure 17 adhered to the limb so the 
exoskeleton and contractive drive cannot flop around. The 
second role is to transfer the actuation forces of 19 into 
pressure forces on the front of the shin so that the shinbone, 1, 
is rotated about the ankle, 3. 
It is our opinion that this approach, as used by Ferris [8], 
results in a less comfortable, less wearable and less 
fashionable solution.  
In the approach researched and presented here the 
traditional arrangement of hard exoskeleton is replaced with a 
slightly modified one as depicted in figure 2b.  
In this design a padded curved saddle and rod 23 lies 
comfortably against the front of the shin and its lower end 
joins at 24 to the second curved rod 25. Rod 25’s lower end 
meets the ground at 26. A strap 27 attaches to rod 25 and 
passes under the ball of the foot and adjoins the other fork 
end of 25. Rod 23 has attached an inflatable pneumatics that 
when inflated pulls on the ties 28 which causes rod 25 to 
rotate about 24. This causes the lower end of rod 25 to drive 
into the ground. The strap connected to rod 25 pulls the ball 
of the foot upwards, causing the foot to rotate about 3. 
When the pneumatic muscle expands the padded saddle 
and rod 23 is pushed against the shin of the lower leg. The 
wearer immediately senses this pressure and can relate to the 
forces at work. A light strap 29 keeps the rod 23 vertical 
around the top of the lower leg. The overall assembly is 
comfortable and integrates into the wearer’s sense of the 
applied forces.  
Whereas in figure 2a the device must be tightly strapped to 
the leg, in figure 2b the exoskeleton can be worn like normal 
footwear, without any strapping at all, and can cater for a 
large range of user sizes and gait types since all the device 
does is introduce perpendicular forces roughly half way up 
the shin. 
III. PROTOTYPE  
In order to test the feasibility of the proposed approach a 
prototype was constructed which was named Hubot for 
Human assistive Robot. 
There are three key features of Hubot; the exoskeleton, the 
air muscle and the power pack. 
A. Exoskeleton 
The first prototype of the exoskeleton was aimed at assisting 
the lower leg and specifically plantar flexion of the foot 
during either a rapid powerful motion, such as a jump, or 
during endurance walking. 
The Hubot prototype is shown in Figure 3. It is made from 
aluminum square tubing and is integrated onto a normal 
running shoe. The device is simply worn as a running shoe. 
The overall weight of the single foot device is 1.5Kg 
including the shoe, the exoskeleton and the air muscle 
assembly. The heavy duty aluminum square tubing used 
included a large margin of breaking strength and the next 
version of the prototype will be achieved with much lighter 
weight components.  
4813
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Front and side views of the Hubot lower leg wearable robotic device. 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  Lighter weight Hubot frame LEFT showing the frame required 
RIGHT showing its integration with the shoe and air muscle. 
 
Figure 4 shows how the assembly can be fabricated using 
reinforced carbon fiber rods, perhaps achieving a final weight 
of less than 800g including the shoe. 
B. Air Muscle 
The traditional McKibben air muscle used for example in 
[6] and [16] suffers from two disadvantages. The main 
disadvantage is the low contraction distance to total length 
ratio, which is usually around 25%. Since the air muscle in the 
proposed approach acts perpendicular to the human limb, the 
air muscle must be much shorter than if the muscle acted 
parallel to the long limb.Additionally the force McKibben air 
muscles produce tends to increase as a function of their 
length, since their circumference remains the same at the 
relaxed state. 
In our paper [17 ] we presented a new type of air muscle as 
shown in figure 5. This air muscle has a contraction to length 
ratio of the order 100% to 200% and the force increases as a 
function of the area of the face. As a result much higher forces 
can be generated over a smaller distance and in a smaller 
volume. In figure 6 is shown the air muscle fabricated for this 
prototype under test. The device is made in a combination of 
latex internal sheath and denim outer layers with nylon 
stitching. It can lift a 16Kg load through 10 cm in 0.3  
seconds at a supply pressure of 2 Bar. Typically, the 
contraction to relaxed length ratio is 120%.  
 
 
 
Fig. 5.  This shows how the expansion of the air chamber converts to the 
contraction of the air muscle, see the arrow getting shorter, in the drive used 
in this work. 
 
 
Fig. 6.  Front and side views of the air muscle fabricated for this work, under 
test, the load of 16Kg is lifted 10cm in 0.3 seconds at 2 Bar. 
C. Back pack air compressor, battery and valves 
The Hubot prototype requires a source of compressed air to 
drive the air muscles. This is derived from a T-Max (Part No. 
8016601) air compressor and a standard 12 volt gel 24Ah 
battery which is assembled into a backpack unit.  
 
 
Fig. 7.  Air compressor and battery back pack.  Belt worn solenoid valves. 
Footwear worn with no straps and only as sports shoes. 
4814
 
 
 
The air solenoid valves controlling flow to the footwear are 
kept on a belt as they should ideally be as close as possible to 
the air muscles and will in future be moved to the footwear. 
Figure 7 shows the back pack and air solenoid valves of the 
fully tether less system. 
IV. TESTING AND RESULTS 
A. Ease of fit and comfort 
In order to determine the fit and comfort for the Hubot 
exoskeleton a simple set of metrics was devised.  
The time to fit on the device is seen as an important aspect, 
since in future such devices might be used by emergency 
services and put on just before going into an emergency 
situation, where time is of the essence. The test was 
performed by simply asking 5 people to put on the suit as it 
currently exists in prototype form and recording the time in 
comparison to putting on similar attire (in this case a heavy 
knapsack and rubber water protective boots). 
The comfort of the device is measured subjectively by 
asking people to wear it and rate the experience stating if the 
apparatus was very uncomfortable, acceptable for a short 
time, OK, comfortable, very comfortable. 
As part of the energy trials to be performed in the next test, 
it was decided relevant to monitor the effect of wearing the 
apparatus on energy expenditure while the apparatus was in 
the switched off state so that we could determine if the suit 
was impeding normal efficient walking. 
B. Athletic Performance Vertical Jump 
One of the main attractions of wearable robotics is the 
possibility that one day we may be able to use them to 
augment our athletic capabilities during different situations.  
Within the sports science community a common metric for 
athleticism is the Vertical Jump Test. Devised in 1921 [18] 
the test requires that the athlete measure the height he can 
jump over and above the point he can touch with the tips of 
his fingers when that hand is fully raised while standing. A 
great deal of normative data has been gathered from world 
class athletes [19] supporting the method as a true test of 
athleticism.  In [20] the data obtained from adult athletes 
suggests that for a male of 20+ years old a jump greater than 
70cm above the standing line, is classed as excellent, while 
50cm is average and below 31cm is poor. The test is aimed to 
assess explosive power and not endurance. 
In the test to be conducted with the Hubot prototype 
device, the vertical jump test is to be executed exactly as 
sports science would require [21]. However for safety reasons 
it was decided that the tester would not wear the full backpack 
apparatus. Instead the wearer would only wear the active 
footwear and carry a compressed air tank ready filled from the 
compressor.  
The tester would first perform the jump test in normal 
clothing. Then the jump would be repeated wearing only 
1.5Kg weights on each foot. Then the jump would be 
performed with the Hubot prototype footwear.  Finally, the 
jump would be performed with the Hubot prototype footwear 
and a 9 litre plastic (PET) air chamber prefilled to 3Bar. 
Just before a jump is actually carried out, the person’s knee 
is bent and the back of the thigh lies in full contact with the 
calf. For the final jump, to release air from the air chambers 
the separation of thigh and calf is used as the trigger to drive 
air into the air muscles. As soon as the feet lift off the ground 
the air pressure in the muscles and air chamber is released. 
C. Athletic Performance Payload and  Incline, Energy 
Expenditure 
Benefits of Hubot towards endurance can be measured by 
estimating any potential savings in energy expenditure when 
using the device during walking. 
During walking as the body’s center of gravity passes over 
the foot the calf muscles begin to contract serving to control 
the body movement as it goes forward so that the body does 
not fall forward [25].  The calf muscle must suddenly support 
almost 3 times the body weight due to the moment arm 
between the Achilles tendon, the ankle and the joint between 
the metatarsus and tarsus. For the rest of the walking gait, 
efficient walking relies mainly on the leg swinging forwards 
and the body vaulting over the planted leg. Therefore the 
main energy component is in the calf muscle and dependent 
on the overall body weight.  
The measurement of energy expenditure may be carried out 
using various types of devices and methods the most often 
quoted being maximal oxygen uptake during which the 
subject must wear a face mask connected to a gas analyzer. In 
[22] an extensive analysis is made which shows that heart rate 
can be used to make relatively accurate energy expenditure 
predictions. This was felt to be an adequate and convenient 
method for the sports like test that was required. In [22] the 
tests published the energy expenditure based on heart rate is 
provided and includes the subject’s gender, heart rate, weight 
and age. For example applying the formula to a 54 year old 
man of 80Kg, the formula gives us the energy expenditure 
EE, 
EE = -28 + 0.6309 x heart rate kJ/min 
The approach is only valid if the heart is beating above the 
FLEX heart rate, which differs for different people and states 
of fitness.  
The steep incline test will use this approach to measure the 
4815
 
 
 
energy expenditure as the test subject uses the Hubot 
prototype device to walk on an inclined treadmill. 
The test is broken into four phases where each phase 
follows a similar pattern. This pattern is as follows. The test 
subject first relaxes for 10 minutes before the test. Then for 
two minutes the heart rate is recorded every 10 seconds as the 
subject stands on the treadmill. This is done in order to 
measure the FLEX heart rate (an average of the lowest heart 
rate recorded and the highest during this standing period). 
Then the treadmill, set at an incline of 5 degrees, is started at 
a speed of 3.3 Km per hour. The heart rate is then monitored 
for 5 minutes as the subject walks at a steady pace. This 
length of time was chosen since preliminary testing indicated 
that the heart rate did not change significantly after a 2 to 3 
minute period. The treadmill used, V-fit T1-08 Treadmill 
SP1609-UK,  includes a heart rate monitoring function and 
this was used and sampled manually every 10 seconds. The 
treadmill is set to a 10% incline throughout the tests. 
In the first test phase, the test subject is wearing normal 
clothing. 
In the second phase the test subject is wearing normal 
clothing, the Hubot backpack and a front pack weighing 17Kg 
to provide a higher payload for the test subject, in all totaling 
33Kg. The test subject wears normal running shoes and a 
1.5Kg ankle strap around each ankle. This test aims to obtain 
an energy expenditure measure that is not impaired by 
possible discomfort introduced by the footwear. 
In the third phase the test subject wears the full Hubot 
apparatus and the front pack including the footwear, but the 
system is powered off. The aim is to check if wearing the 
footwear results in higher energy expenditure due to 
discomfort. 
 
 
Fig. 8.  Frame from the video capture of the fourth phase of steep incline 
endurance test. 
In the fourth phase the test subject wears the full Hubot 
apparatus and the front pack.  The Hubot prototype is now 
fully powered on at an operating pressure of 200 kPa. At each 
step on the treadmill, the user signals using a micro-switch 
attached to his thumb, when the valves should be activated. 
The release of air from the air muscle is automatic when the 
foot leaves the ground.  
The main aim of test is to determine if the energy 
expenditure recorded while wearing the Hubot prototype 
device is lower when switched on compared to when it is 
switched off. Figure 8 shows the Hubot prototype in use and 
powered on during the fourth phase of the trial. 
D. Results and Discussion 
The results obtained provide useful information about the 
Hubot prototype ease of use, comfort and assistance in both 
explosive power and endurance modes. 
 
Ease of fit and comfort: To establish fit and comfort the 
feedback from 5 students who were invited to wear the 
prototype was recorded. 
The mean time to put on the footwear and back pack and 
solenoid belt was 55 seconds. Whereas to put on water 
resistant rubber boots and to strap on a single oxygen cylinder 
used in underwater diving averaged only 50 seconds. From 
this one can postulate that the ease of fit is acceptable in most 
emergency service or industry situations. 
When asked about the general comfort the subjects all 
stressed that the weight of the footwear was excessive and at 
most should be equivalent to the rubber waterproof footwear 
which weighted 900g. 
The subjects liked the fact that any running shoe could be 
modified to accept the Hubot frame since individuals had 
different shoe preferences.   
The impact of the comfort of the footwear on the energy 
expenditure is treated in the following next section. 
 
Athletic Performance Vertical Jump:  The data presented 
here for the vertical jump test comes from only one test 
subject although more subjects are planned to take part.  
Table I shows the condition of each jump, the average 
increase above the standing height for the jumps and a power 
rating calculated according to [23], which allows one to infer 
the peak power output of the test subject given the data and 
context. The results from jump 2 and 3 indicate that the 
wearing of ankle weights is roughly as hindering as wearing 
the inactive Hubot footwear since.  
When the footwear is driven actively, Jump 4,  the jump 
improves to a level above the plain clothes level, implying 
4816
 
 
 
that the energy provided by the footwear overcomes the 
weight of the footwear as well as improves the test subject’s 
explosive power. 
TABLE I.  VERTICAL JUMP RESULTS 
Reference 
Height : 
221cm 
Condition 
Average Vertical 
Height above 
reference height 
for 3 best jumps  
Power rating using 
Sayers Equation 
[22]  
Jump 1 Plain clothes 50cm 
4740W 
Jump 2 
Plain clothes plus 
ankle weights 
45cm 
4436W 
Jump 3 
Hubot prototype 
inactive 
44cm 
4375W 
Jump 4 
Hubot prototype 
activated 
55cm 
5043W 
 
Using Sayers formulae there is an increase in power of 
around 250W, which could be associated with the power 
provided by the air muscle. We know from tests that at the 
pressure setting each air muscle can deliver approximately 
20Joules in 0.3 seconds (approximately 60W). The Hubot 
prototype comprises four air muscles fired simultaneously. 
Combined it is therefore estimated that the Hubot prototype 
could deliver 240W over the short period of the jump which 
would roughly agree with the results obtained. 
 
Athletic Performance Payload and Incline, Energy 
Expenditure:   This test was conducted with one test subject 
although more are planned.  
The results obtained are based on the observed heart rate of 
the test subject. According to [24] when examining the heart 
rate to infer energy expenditure it is crucial that tests are 
carried out well above the FLEX heart rate such that inter 
individual differences become negligible and energy 
expenditure at different work rates may be accurately 
compared. Therefore for each phase of the tests the subject’s 
heart rate was first measured before the physical exertion 
began in order to check the lowest and highest heart rate 
during relaxed and slight exercise (standing at an incline). 
From this the FLEX heart rate was calculated. 
In all the tests presented the FLEX heart rate for the test 
subject was 81 BPM or less. When the test subject is recorded 
with a BPM above this figure we can be sure that the heart 
rates obtained not only reflect linearly the energy 
consumption of the subject, but also and crucially that we may 
compare the heart rates from different subsequent trials, 
inferring comparative energy expenditure. The results are 
summarized in Fig. 9. From the graphs, one can observe that 
all heart rates rise well above the FLEX heart rate after the 
first minute. 
 
Fig. 9.  Manually recorded heart rates for each phase of the testing. 
 
 
For the plain clothes test the subject is walking up a mild 
incline with no additional weight. When the test is repeated 
wearing the 17Kg back pack, the energy expenditure inferred 
from the heart rate clearly rises. This test is done first with 
1.5Kg ankle weights on each foot and then again with the 
Hubot footwear. In both tests the inferred energy expenditure 
appears to plateau at the same level. 
This result adds to comments from test subjects and allows 
us to infer that the shape of the footwear does not impact 
energy expenditure and that the weight is far more critical. 
Therefore one conclusion is to keep the basic design but 
fabricate the footwear as light weight as possible. 
When the test subject wears an additional 16Kg front pack, 
there is a marked increase in inferred energy expenditure. 
Since the relationships between the graphs may be considered 
linear, we can estimate that wearing the 16Kg front pack 
doubles the energy expenditure over wearing just the back 
pack, when compared to wearing just plain clothes. 
When the Hubot prototype is powered up and the test 
repeated, while wearing the 16Kg front pack, the inferred 
energy expenditure falls to a point in between wearing both 
packs and wearing the back pack alone. The result indicates 
that the prototype has contributed to the total energy required 
to perform the walk and reduced the necessary energy spent 
by the test subject.      
At this stage the intention is not to perform a detailed 
analysis of the power savings. The main purpose has been to 
demonstrate that the system functions and can reduce energy 
expenditure and therefore improve human endurance. 
A logical next test, which was not possible to complete 
within time of writing, is to determine if the energy 
expenditure used to carry the back pack can be offset in full 
(or more) by the prototype. These results are encouraging and 
4817
 
 
 
form solid material for future work.   
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
A. Contribution to Exoskeleton based wearable robotics 
In this research work, a prototype has been developed to 
demonstrate that an easy to wear, comfortable exoskeleton 
can be used to increase both powerful explosive actions as 
well as contribute to endurance tasks such as walking with 
high payload. 
The results obtained strongly suggest that the proposed new 
approach to the use of contractive drives and exoskeletons are 
beneficial, practical and ergonomic. 
The prototype produced explosive power enabling 
significantly improved vertical jump, however the 
improvement is small when compared to the weight of the 
back pack which was not worn during the tests. Therefore 
improved light weight air compression technology is crucial 
for this approach to be of use in the real world.  
The air compressors available today are targeted at low 
cost, high pressure automobile tyre inflation where weight 
does not matter. With attention given to special materials and 
a low pressure mode of operation, the future availability of 
lighter compressors seems feasible 
A key conclusion that the work has led to is that wearable 
robotics must be wearable and integral in the human actions 
being performed. Loose fitting devices whose drive forces act 
perpendicularly to limbs feel as if they are self-adhering to the 
limbs and no complex straps are required. They also feel as 
though they are truly assisting the user rather than controlling 
the user. 
B. Future Work 
The tests here were conducted with a 17Kg backpack 
comprising the main compressor and battery. Very recently 
we have reduced this to 8Kg and aim to finally achieve 6Kg. 
This will represent a less bulky solution. In future work the 
results will be expanded to test the device on more subjects. It 
is hoped that the tests will be conducted outdoors, using 
wearable ECG sensors to record overall energy expenditure of 
subjects and control subjects performing similar tasks, such as 
hill climbing carrying heavy loads.  
Following this, the aim is to incorporate a torso and thigh 
assist section to the Hubot and determine its impact on 
sprinting and long distance running. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] "Raytheon Unveils Second Generation Exoskeleton Robotic Suit", 
http://raytheon.mediaroom.com/index.php?s=43&item=1652. 
[2] "Robot Suit HAL", http://www.cyberdyne.jp/english/robotsuithal/. 
[3] "Stride Management Assist", 
http://corporate.honda.com/innovation/walk-assist/ 
[4] "Human Universal Load Carrier, or HULC", 
http://www.lockheedmartin.co.uk/us/products/hulc.html. 
[5] "Ekso™ bionic suit", http://www.eksobionics.com/ekso. 
[6] Michael Wehner, Brendan Quinlivan, Patrick M Aubin, Ernesto 
Martinez-Villalpando, Michael Baumann, Leia Stirling, Kenneth Holt, 
Robert Wood, "A Lightweight Soft Exosuit for Gait Assistance", 2013 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA) 
Karlsruhe, Germany, May 6-10, 2013 
[7] Caputo, J. M., Collins, S. H. (2013) An experimental robotic testbed 
for  accelerated development of ankle prostheses. Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
[8] D. Ferris and C. Lewis, “Robotic lower limb exoskeletons using 
proportional myoelectric control,” in EMBC 2009, Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, 2009. 
[9] Chu, H. Kazerooni and A. Zoss, On the biomimetic design of the 
Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX), in IEEE Int. Conf. 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA) (IEEE Press, Barcelona, Spain, 
2006), pp. 4356–4363. 
[10] Kawamoto, H., et al. Power assist method for HAL-3 using EMGbased 
feedback controller. in Systems, Man and Cybernetics, 2003. IEEE 
International Conference on. 2003. 
[11] S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, “Active leg exoskeleton 
(alex) for gait rehabilitation of motor-impaired patients,” in Proc. 2007 
IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabil. Robotics, 2007, pp. 401–407 
[12] Walsh, C., Endo, K., Herr, H.A Quasi-Passive Leg Exoskeleton for 
Load Carrying Augmentation. International Journal of Humanoid 
Robotics, Special Issue: Active Exoskeletons, 4(3): 487-506, 2007 
[13] "Kneeling chair", http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kneeling_chair 
[14] A, Schiele, “Ergonomics of Exoskeletons: Objective Performance 
Metrics” in Euro Haptics conference on Haptic Interfaces, Salt Lake 
City, UT, USA, March 2009 
[15] “Mindwalker”, https://mindwalker-project.eu/ 
[16] F. Daerden, “Pneumatic artificial muscles: actuators for robotics and 
automation”, European Journal of Mechanical and Environmental 
Engineering, 47(1):10–21, 2002 
[17] D. Majoe, L. Widmer, J. Gutknecht, "Pneumatic Air Muscle and 
Pneumatic Sources for Light Weight Autonomous Robots ",  2011 
IEEE International Conference Robotics and Automation (ICRA), , 9-
13 May 2011,  Shanghai,  p3243 - 3250. 
[18] Sargent, D.A. (1921). The Physical Test of a Man. American Physical 
Education Review, 26,188-194. 
[19] Chu, D. (1996) Explosive Power and Strength. USA; Human Kinetics 
Publishers, Inc. 
[20] ARKINSTALL, M et al. (2010) VCE Physical Education 2. Malaysia: 
Macmillian. p.248 
[21] http://www.brianmac.co.uk/sgtjump.htm 
[22] Keytel LR, Goedecke JH, Noakes TD, Hiiloskorpi H, Laukkanen R, 
van der Merwe L, Lambert EV., "Prediction of energy expenditure 
from heart rate monitoring during submaximal exercise.", J Sports Sci. 
2005 Mar;23(3):289-97. 
[23] Sayers, S. et al. (1999) Cross-validation of three jump power equations. 
Med Sci Sports Exerc, 31, p. 572 
[24] Spurr, G. B., Prentice, A. M., Murgatroyd, P. R., Goldberg, G. R., 
Reina, J. C. & Christman, N. T. (1988). Energy expenditure from 
minute-by-minute heart-rate recording comparison with indirect 
calorimetry. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 48, 552-559 
[25] Winter, D.A., Yack,  H.J. “EMG profiles during normal human 
walking: stride-to-stride and inter-subject variability”, 
Electroencephalography and clinical Neurophysiology, 1987, 67:402-
411 Elsevier Scientific Publishers Ireland  
4818
