Hovering of MAV by Using Magnetic Adhesion and Winch Mechanisms
Kazuaki Yanagimura, Kazunori Ohno, Yoshito Okada, Eijiro Takeuchi, and Satoshi Tadokoro
AbstractÑWeproposeamethodbywhichamicroairvehicle
(MAV) can hover without propulsion power. In this paper,
we describe the design of a magnetic adhesion mechanism
and a winch mechanism for an MAV that is used to perform
searchoperationsinsidebuildings.AnMAVequippedwiththese
mechanisms can adhere to an iron ceiling and search for a long
time from an appropriate position. We designed a magnetic
adhesion mechanism with an adhesion force of over 20 N. The
magnetic adhesion mechanism comprises a magnet, dual coil
springs, and a switching mechanism. Using models of MAV and
the adhesion mechanism, we determined the parameters of the
mechanism.Themagneticadhesionmechanismcanbedetached
easily by a force less than the magnetic adhesion force. The
winch mechanism comprises a structure to retriev the adhesion
mechanism, a strong, lightweight tether and a servo-motor that
produces enough torque to lift the MAV by the tether. We
conÞrmed that the MAV can hover without propulsion power
by using these mechanisms.
I. INTRODUCTION
We have researched a micro air vehicle (MAV) that can
search inside damaged buildings. MAVs can enable us to
search places that are difÞcult for people to search, such
as plumbing at high positions in industrial plant or in and
around the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant. Actually,
a Global Hawk unmanned aircraft was used to search outside
the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant. One paper
reportedthatthecombinationofanunmannedgroundvehicle
and MAV was effective for searching damaged buildings[1].
MAVs are appropriate for searching disaster sites.
AbatterypoweredMAVisappropriateforsearchinginside
damaged buildings because it is smaller and safer than an
MAV driven by petrol. However, its payload is limited, and
its ßight time is from 10 to 15 minutes. The ßight time
decreases to half when the MAV hovers. We seek to increase
the ßight time.
Hovering mode consumes much energy. Electrical devices
mounted on an MAV do not require as much energy as the
propulsion power. Therefore, we consider that the ßight time
canbeextendedbyreducingthepowerrequiredforhovering.
Adhesion to a wall or ceiling is one solution for hovering
without propulsion power. In the present paper, we propose
a method by which an MAV hovers and observe without
propulsion power by using a magnetic adhesion mechanism
and a winch mechanism. The proposed method is similar to
spiders.
Several researchers have studied MAVs with mounted
adhesion mechanisms. Yong Liu developed an MAV like
*This work was not supported by any organization
All authors are with Graduate School of Information
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. Kazuaki Yanagimura:
yanagimura@rm.is.tohoku.ac.jp
ceiling
MAV
adhesion
mechanism
winch
mechanism
(a)Approach (b)Adhesion (c)Holding
object
Fig. 1. Adhesion task
resembles a bat in that it can adhere to a ceiling and detach
arbitrarily by using a negative pressure (suction) mechanism.
JamesF.RobertsdevelopedanMAVwithamountedmagnet.
Withthehelpofthemagnet,itcanadheretoaceilingwithout
consuming power, and it can arbitrarily switch between
adhering and detaching. By referencing these related works,
we propose a magnetic adhesion mechanism. In addition, we
have added a new function by which an MAV approaches a
target object from above by using a winch mechanism.
Many approaches have been proposed for adhering to
walls and ceilings: negative pressure[4], [5], magnetic
adhesion[6],[7],microspines[8],electricaladhesion[9],[10],
adhesivepad[11],[12], andbiomimetics[13], [14].Our target
environment is industrial plants and damaged buildings.
Therefore, we require our adhesion method to fulÞll the
following criteria.
1) Low power consumption (0 W) and strong adhesion
force (>20 N)
2) Light weight (<100 g)
3) Repeated use of adhesion mechanism
4) Minimal damage to target objects
5) Adhesion to various materials
We compared each adhesion method on the basis of the
abovementionedcriteria.Table.Iliststhecomparisonresults.
Magnetic adhesion fulÞlled almost all the criteria.
Therefore,weselectedmagneticadhesionforouradhesion
mechanism. Although magnet can adhere only to ferro-
magnetic substances such as iron and steel, we considered
that magnetic adhesion mechanism would be useful because
there is usually much iron and steel in industrial plants and
damaged buildings.
In this paper, we propose a small and light magnetic
adhesion and a winch mechanism for an MAV. In Section
II, we explain the process that a hovering MAV performs
the task of observation. In Sections III and IV, we describe
mechanisms mounted on an MAV. In Section V, we show
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6250
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF ADHESION METHODS (++:FAVORABLE,+:LITTLE FAVORABLE,-:SLIGHTLY UNFAVORABLE, ??:UNFAVORABLE)
adhesion low power adhesion force continuous less danger attaching to
method consumption for weight using to surroundings diverse substance
negative pressure[4], [5] - ++ ++ + ++
magnetic adhesion[6], [7] ++ ++ ++ ++ ??
micro spines[8] ++ + ++ - +
electrical adhesion[9], [10] + - + - ++
adhesive pad[11], [12] ++ + - + -
biomimetics[13], [14] ++ - - + -
how an MAV can adhere to a ceiling, lower itself on a tether,
and observe objects.
II. TARGET OBSERVATION USING MAV WITH MAGNETIC
ADHESION AND WINCH MECHANISM
A. Outline of target task
We observed target objects using an MAV that can hover
without propulsion power. Figure 1 shows the outline of
our target task. First, the MAV ßies and approaches the
ceiling (Fig. 1(a)). Then, it adheres to the ceiling by using
an adhesion mechanism (Fig. 1(b)). After adhering to the
ceiling, the MAV stops its rotors and moves to an arbitrary
height by rolling the tether up or down. A winch mechanism
is used to unroll and roll up the tether. After performing
the observation, the MAV rolls up the tether and retrieves
the adhesion mechanism (Fig. 1(c)). By repeating these pro-
cesses, the MAV can adhere to a ceiling, make observations,
and then ßy to a new location. Hovering without propulsion
power can extend the search time.
We propose an adhesion mechanism that can adhere and
detach repeatedly. In addition, we propose a winch mecha-
nism that can unroll and roll up the tether and switch the
adhesion mechanism between adhesion and release modes
by using a single motor mounted on the MAV. The adhesion
mechanism does not contain any actuators. Therefore, the
winch mechanism does not unroll and roll up any electric
cables. This characteristic can prevent electrical cables from
breaking, and it allows us to use a thin cable.
B. MAV and requirement of adhesion mechanism
We used a quadrotor made by Ascending Technology
as the MAV. Its weight is 1.27 kg, and its payload is
330 g. Its ßight time is 15 min at maximum weight. The
adhesion and winch mechanisms need to support the weight;
therefore, the target adhesion force must be greater than 20
N. Furthermore, weight of the mechanisms must be less than
the payload of the MAV (330 g). Therefore, the total weight
of the mechanism should be under 100 g. We designed these
mechanisms by fulÞlling these target values.
III. ADHESION MECHANISM
A. Outline of adhesion mechanism
We designed a magnetic adhesion mechanism mounted
on an MAV. A strong neodymium magnet can generate
an adhesion force greater than 20 N. However, detaching
it requires an even stronger force. We seek to detach the
switching
mechanism
control 
sha
coil
spring
nonmagnec 
frame
magnet
silicone
rubber
Fig. 2. Developed magnetic adhesion mechanism
adhesion mechanism with a weaker force. An internally
balanced magnetic unit (IB magnet[15]) is one solution. The
IB magnet adheres to ferromagnetic materials by using a
magnet and is detached by less force because of the elastic
force of a spring. By using an mechanism of IB magnet, we
developed a magnetic adhesion mechanism with an adhesion
force greater than 20 N and release force that is less than 20
N. In addition, the switching between these modes is done
using the winch mechanism.
The structure of the magnetic adhesion mechanism is
described in Section III-B. We determined that our magnet
generates sufÞcient adhesion force using the MAV model
described in Section III-C. We formularize the elastic force
of the magnetic adhesion mechanism in Section III-D. From
the models, an appropriate pair of coil springs was selected.
In Section III-E, we evaluate the developed adhesion mech-
anism.
B. Composition of adhesion mechanism
Figure 2 shows the developed magnetic adhesion mech-
anism. It comprises a control shaft, dual coil springs, a
switchingmechanism,amagnet,andasiliconrubberbumper.
Figures 3 and 4 show the adhering and detaching motion
of the developed adhesion mechanism. The switching mech-
anism alternates its operation mode. By pushing the switch,
the MAV can adhere to a ceiling and then detach. Because
of the dual coil springs inside the adhesion mechanism, the
MAV can detach with less force than magnetic adhesion
6251
displacement:
(x? -x)[mm]
displacement:
{(x?-x)+x?}[mm]
x?[mm]
x?[mm]
x?[mm]
x[mm]
push switch
F
part A
control sha
magnet
x?
x?
x?
(a) (b) (c)
part B
Fig. 3. Flow of adhering motion
x?
x?
x?
x?+x?
x?+x?
displacement:
(x?+x?)[mm]
push switch
displacement:
(x?-x?)[mm]
displacement:
x?[mm]
(a) (b) (c)
F
Fig. 4. Flow of detaching motion
force.
When the mechanism adheres to a ceiling, part A inside
the switching mechanism moves to the high position (Fig.
3(b)). It cannot move to a lower position. An elastic force
fromthecoilspringsisappliedtothecontrolshaft.However,
themagnetremainsadheredtothesurfacebecausetheelastic
force is less than magnetic adhesive force (Fig. 3(c)).
When the mechanism is detached, the part inside the
switching mechanism moves to the low position. By pushing
the switch and moving the part to a higher position, it can
then be moved to a lower position (Fig. 4(b)). The sum
of the elastic forces of dual coil springs is applied to the
control shaft (Fig. 4(c)). If the sum of elastic forces is
stronger than the magnetic adhesive force, the magnet inside
the adhesion mechanism is detached. After detaching, the
adhesion mechanism returns the state shown in Fig. 3(a).
Therefore, the MAV can adhere and detach repeatedly. In
addition, to increase the coefÞcient of friction, we integrated
a silicon rubber bumper into the mechanism. To lighten it,
all components are made of acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene
(ABS) plastic, except the magnet, spring, and silicone rubber
bumper.
6252
(a)
(b)
Fig. 7. Performance evaluation experiment
F = k
1
(x
1
+x
2
) (6)
When the magnet is detached, the displacement of the
control shaft is x
2
[mm], and the displacement of part A is
(x
2
?x
3
) [mm].
We need to satisfy Eq. (7) below so that the magnet is
not detached during the adhering motion, as shown in Fig.
3, and it is detached after the detaching motion, as shown in
Fig. 4.
k
2
x
2
<F
M
<k
1
(x
2
?x
3
)+k
2
x
2
(7)
We determined the elastic modulus, k
1
,k
2
that satisÞes
the above formula.
E. Evaluation of adhesion mechanism
We evaluated the adhesion mechanism designed in Sec-
tions III-C and III-D. Figure 7 shows the experimental
equipment. The object is to adhere to a plate of S45C with
a thickness of 3 mm. We measured forces Þve times in each
case. We evaluated the elastic force, which is calculated in
Section III-D, and we chose a combination of coil springs
from available springs. Additionally, we evaluated whether
the adhesion mechanism performed as described in Section
III-C.
Thedimensionsoftheadhesionmechanismareasfollows:
x
1
= 2.5 mm, x
2
= 6.0 mm, x
3
= 2.0 mm. The combinations
of dual coil springs we used are (k
1
,k
2
) = (1.0,4.5) [N/mm],
(1.4,4.1) [N/mm], (2.9,2.9) [N/mm]. Tables II and III list
the experimental results. The pushing force to adhere the
adhesion mechanism is between 20 N and 26N. It is smaller
than the magnetic force 30 N. The pushing force to detach
the adhesion mechanism is approximately 10 N in the Þrst
two combinations; for the third combination, it equal to the
magnetic adhesion force comparison.
In all cases in Tables II and III, the measured value was
higher than the theoretical value. We think this was due
to friction between the parts, as well as the extra elastic
forces of the coil springs due to dimensional error. Though
the error exists, we can estimate the force to actuate the
mechanism substantially in the case of (k
1
,k
2
) = (1.4,4.1)
[N/mm], (2.9,2.9) [N/mm]. In the case of (k
1
,k
2
) = (1.0,4.5)
[N/mm], the adhesion mechanism could not adhere owing to
the extra elastic force of the inside coil spring, so the error
was greater than in the other result. From measurements, we
chose the combination of (k
1
,k
2
) = (1.4,4.1) [N/mm].
TABLE II
PUSHING FORCE TO ADHERE
theoretical measured
k
1
k
2
value value error
(N/mm) (N/mm) (N) (N) (N)
1.0 4.5 20.7 20.0 -0.7
1.4 4.1 21.7 22.7 +1.0
2.9 2.9 26.8 28.1 +1.3
TABLE III
PUSHING FORCE TO DETACH
theoretical measured
k
1
k
2
value value error
(N/mm) (N/mm) (N) (N) (N)
1.0 4.5 8.5 15.1 +6.6
1.4 4.1 11.9 13.3 +1.4
2.9 2.9 24.7 26.0 +1.3
adhesion 
mechanism
tether
motor
space for adhesion
mechanism
Fig. 8. Composition of winch mechanism
Furthermore, we evaluated the adhesion mechanism into
which the above combination of coil springs is built, for
adhesion force, coefÞcient of friction, and moment. We
pulled the adhesion mechanism vertically and horizontally,
and measured the force at the time it detached.
The adhesion force was measured to be 31.28 (±0.60)
N, and the coefÞcient of friction was measured to be 0.87
(±0.01). In addition, the adhesion mechanism was not de-
tached by moment. On the basis of these results, we showed
that the developed mechanism meets the performance re-
quirements described in Section III-C.
IV. WINCH MECHANISM
A. Composition of winch mechanism
Figure 8 shows the developed winch mechanism. It con-
sists of a tether, a reel, and an actuator. Figure 9 shows
the motion of the winch mechanism. When the adhesion
mechanism adheres to the ceiling, the MAV moves to an
appropriate height for carrying out observation by using
the winch mechanism (Fig. 9(a)). The MAV retrieves the
adhesion mechanism by rolling up the tether and pushing
the switch for the adhesion mechanism (Fig. 9(b)). After
the retrieval, the MAV can ßy (Fig. 9(c)). The adhesion
and release modes can be actuated using a single motor.
6254
metal
displace by motor
metal metal
push switch return ßight state
(a)Adhering (b)Pushing (c)Detaching
Fig. 9. Winch mechanism tasks
target object
air mat
steel plate
Fig. 10. Experimental equipment
A polyethylene tether is used because it is light, thin, and
strong enough to support the MAV. An actuator is needed
to generate a force greater than 20 N for lifting the MAV.
Therefore, the target torque is greater than 20 Ncm because
the radius of reel is 10 mm. We selected 60 rpm as the reel
speed. From these target values, we selected a servomotor
made by Dynamixel as the actuator.
Its maximum torque is 260 Nm, maximum rotation speed
is 126 rpm, weight is 67 g, and maximum power consump-
tion is 29 W. This servomotor can repeatedly generate strong
forces because it has metal gears. Moreover, the servomotor
containsacontrollerandiseasilycontrolledfromanonboard
PC.
B. Evaluation winch mechanism
We show whether the MAV can move to an arbitrary
height using the winch mechanism. In addition, we mea-
sured the power consumption to compare it with power
consumption of a hovering MAV, and we validated the
improvement in power consumption. Figure 10 shows the
experimental equipment. We connected the tether to the
upper structure and had the MAV change its height using
the winch mechanism. We measured the power consumption
while the MAV changed its position at speeds of 3.3 cm/s,
6.6 cm/s, and 13.2 cm/s (maximum speed).
Fig. 11. MAV with integrated adhesion and winch mechanism
Power consumption was measured to be 3.25 W at 3.3
cm/s, 4.82 W at 6.6 cm/s, and 2.53 W at 13.2 cm/s. Then,
we calculated the power consumption of the hovering MAV.
The electric energy capacity of the battery mounted on the
MAV is 66.6 Wh, and the ßight time of the MAV is 15
minutes.
On the basis of these speciÞcations, we calculated that
power consumption of ßying the MAV to be 266.4 W.
Moreover, the MAV consume approximately twice as much
power when it is hovering as when it is ßying, so we
calculated power consumption for hovering the MAV to be
532.8 W. The maximum power consumption of the winch
mechanism is less than 1% of power consumption of a
hovering MAV. On the basis of this comparison it was
concluded that the winch mechanism consumes much less
electric power than a hovering MAV.
V. ADHERING AND ROLLING UP EXPERIMENT USING
MAV
Weintegratedthemagneticadhesionmechanismdescribed
in Section III and the winch mechanism described in Section
IV into the MAV. We evaluated whether it could achieve the
target task.
The integrated MAV is shown in Fig. 11, and the system
on the MAV is shown in Fig. 12. As shown in Fig. 12,
we can maneuver using Atomboard by radio communication
6255
REFERENCES
[1] Nathan Michael, Shaojie Shen, Kartik Mohta, Yash Mulgaokar, Vijay
Kumar, Keiji Nagatani, Yoxhito Okada, Seiga Kiribayashi, Kazuki
Otake, Kazuya Yoshida, Kazunori Ohno, Eijiro Takeuchi, and Satoshi
Tadokoro, ÓCollaborative Mapping of an Earthquake-Damaged Build-
ing via Ground and Aerial RobotsÓ, Field and Service Robotics, 2013
[2] Yong Liu, Heping Chen, Zhenmin Tang, and Guoxin Sun, ÓA Bat-like
Switched Flying and Adhesive RobotÓ, IEEE International Conference
on Cyber Technology in Automation, Control and Intelligent Systems,
pp.92-97, 2012
[3] James F. Roberts, Jean-Christophe Zufferey, and Dario Floreano,
ÓEnergy Management for Indoor Hovering RobotsÓ, IEEE/RSJ In-
ternational Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems Acropolis
Convention Center, pp1242-1247, 2008
[4] Yusuke OTA, Toru KUGA, and Kan YONEDA, ÓDeformation Com-
pensation for Continuous Force control of a Wall Climbing Quadruped
with Reduced-DOFÓ, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp.468-474, May 2006
[5] Shanqiang Wu, Lijun Wu, and Tao Liu, ÓDesign of a Sliding Wall
Climbing Robot with a Novel Negative Adsorption DeviceÓ, IEEE
International Conference on Ubiquitous Robots and Ambient Intelli-
gence, pp.97-100, 2011
[6] Zeliang Xu and Peisun Ma, ÓA wall-climbing robot for labelling scale
of oil tankÕs volumeÓ, Robotica, Vol.20, pp.209-212, 2002
[7] Samuel Jensen-Segal, Steven Virost, and William R. Provancher,
ÓROCR: Dynamic vertical wall climbing with a pendular two-link
mass-shifting robotÓ, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp.3040-3045, 2008
[8] Aaron Parness, Matthew Frost, Nitish Thatte, and Jonathan P. King,
ÓGravity-Independent Mobility and Drilling on Natural Rock Using
MicrospinesÓ, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation, pp.3437-3442, 2012
[9] Harsha Prahlad, Ron Pelrine, Scott Stanford, John Marlow, and Roy
Kornbluh, ÓElectroadhesive Robots - Wall Climbing Robots Enabled
by a Novel, Robust, and Electrically Controllable Adhesion Technol-
ogyÓ, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
pp.3028-3033, 2008
[10] Huan P. Diaz Tellez, Jeff Krahn, and Carlo Menon, ÓCharacterization
of Electro-adhesives for Robotic ApplicationsÓ, IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, pp.1867-1872, 2011
[11] Ozgur Unver, Ali Uneri, Alper Aydemir, and Metin Sitti, ÓGeckobot:
A Gecko Inspired Climbing Robot Using Elastomer AdhesivesÓ, IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp.2329-2335,
2006
[12] Michael P. Murphy, William Tso, Michael Tanzini, Metin Sitti, ÓWaal-
bot: An Agile Small-Scale Wall Climbing Robot Utilizing Pressure
Sensitive AdhesivesÓ, IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems, pp.3411-3416, 2006
[13] Kellar Autumn, ÓProperties, Principles, and Parameters of the Gecko
Adhesive SystemÓ, 2006
[14] Sangbae Kim, Matthew Spenko, Salomon Trujilo, Barrett Heyneman,
Virgilio Mattoli, and Mark R. Cutkosky, ÓWhole body adhesion:
hierarchical, directional and distributed control of adhesive forces for
a climbing robotÓ, IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, pp.1268-1273, 2007
[15] Shigeo Hirose, ÓA New Design Criterion in Robotic Mechanism (Pre-
vention of Negative Power Consumption)Ó, IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp131-135, 1993
6257
