  
? 
Abstract—3D assembly of cellular structures is important for 
the fabrication of biological substitute in tissue engineering. In 
this paper, a novel rail-guided multi-microrobotic system was 
proposed for the assembly of cellular structure. The cellular 
2-dimensional (2D) module was fabricated by UV illumination 
of the crosslinkable hydrogel. The coordinated manipulation 
among the micromanipulators was performed with newly 
designed concentric movement along the rail, which realized the 
arbitrary change of micromanipulator posture. Through the 
rotation of the end-effectors around the specimen without 
swapping out the visual field, the manipulation flexibility was 
improved. The distance information between the 
micromanipulator and the module was acquired from vision 
feedback system and utilized for the automatic pick-up of the 
microstructure. Through the cooperation among 
multi-manipulators with hybrid motors, the micromanipulation 
to assemble the 3D structure with 30 nm operation resolution 
was achieved. Finally, the rail-guided DeSCom system realized 
the bottom-up fabrication of cellular vascular-like microtube 
with vision feedback. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Tissue engineering as one of the innovative biomedical 
technologies has echoed widely concerns for achieving the 
goals of harvesting human tissues in vitro cultivation. Clinical 
application of engineered tissues has been realized in several 
tissues such as skin, cornea and cartilage [1]. However, there 
are still some challenges on the way to engineer the complex 
organs like heart, liver and kidney. One of the challenges to 
fabricate the complex biological substitute is the limitation of 
achieving thick three-dimension heterogeneous composite 
tissue with vascular network [2-3]. Vascular network as the 
extra-matrix of cells in the complex tissue provides the access 
to delivery oxygen and nutrition [4]. Although the oxygen 
delivery based on diffusion phenomenon can happen within 
100-200 ?m, the inability to generate the vascular-like 
structures thinner than 200 ?m still hinder the realization of 
 
*Research supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of 
China under grants 61375108 and 60925014, the National Nature Science 
Foundation of China for Distinguished Young Scholars under grant 
60925014, and "111 Project" under Grant B08043. 
Huaping Wang, Tao Sun, Qiang Huang and Toshio Fukuda are with the 
Intelligent Robotics Institute, Key Laboratory of Biomimetic Robots and 
Systems, Ministry of Education, Key Laboratory of Intelligent Control and 
Decision of Complex System, School of Mechatronical Engineering, Beijing 
Institute of Technology, 5 South Zhongguancun Street, Haidian District, 
Beijing 100081. 
Contacting author: Huaping (phone: +86-68913111; fax: +86-68915812; 
e-mail: wanghuaping@bit.edu.cn ) 
Masahiro Nakajima, Tao Yue, Pei Di, Masaru Takeuchi and Toshio 
Fukuda are with the Institute for Advanced Research, Nagoya University, 
Nagoya, Japan. 
Toshio Fukuda is with the Faculty of Science and Engineering, Meijo 
University, Nagoya, Japan. 
complex tissue with biological significance [5]. To solve the 
issue of organ loss and failure radically, the new fabrication 
method aiming at vascular rich structures needs to be 
addressed. 
The existing fabrication methods for vascular rich 
structures are top-down scaffold and bottom-up 
microfluidic-based system [6]. Scaffolds serving as artificial 
extracellular matrix provide optimal cellular environments for 
penetration, ingrowth, and vascularization [7-8]. Through the 
biodegradation and the growth of the cells at the ratio, the 
vascular network can be achieved [9]. However, the control of 
the biodegradation is limited which results the difficulty to 
fabricate the 3D tissue with micro-scaled structures. From a 
fluidic point of view, microfluidic systems have emerged as 
promising tools for building the pathological models of 
vasculature. Through the assembly of 3-dimensional (3D) cell 
structure with the precise manipulation provided by optical 
tweezers, DEP and fluidic forces, the vascular-like structure 
can be realized [10-12]. However, it is difficult to fully 
remodeling the native vessel by the fabricated 
microvasculature incorporating microchannels with rectangle 
cross-section.  
Recently, microrobotic techniques aiming at observation, 
measurement and immobilization of micro-/nano-scale 
objects have been developed [13-14]. As one method of 
bottom-up assembly in generating complex biological tissues, 
3D Assembly of Cellular Structures with Coordinated Manipulation 
by Rail-guided Multi-microrobotic System * 
Huaping Wang*, Tao Yue, Masahiro Nakajima, Masaru Takeuchi, Pei Di, Tao Sun, 
Qiang Huang and Toshio Fukuda, Fellow, IEEE 
 
Fig. 1 3D cellular structure assembly with rail-guided DeSCom system 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2813
  
through the direct contact between mechanical end-effector 
and microstructure without the restriction of operation 
environment interfering electrically or optically, the 
microrobotics can provide more stable and flexible 
manipulation with larger force [15]. For most of the 
microrobotic systems, the main issue is how to achieve precise 
control with direct contact during manipulation [16-17]. 
Researchers have made many achievements in precise robotic 
manipulation. For example, Hong Qiao proposed the concept 
of “Attractive Region in Environment” (ARIE) in [18], which 
is very important in 3D high precision manipulation for 
manufacturing. In our previous research, the assembly of 3D 
structure was realized with dual dextrous sticks cooperation. 
However, the arbitrary change of the tip posture during 
assembly was not performed [19]. 
In this paper, we proposed a novel bottom-up assembly 
method of cellular 3D hydrogel structures based on the 
rail-guided microrobotic system. To realize the arbitrary 
change of the end-effector posture during micromanipulation, 
we amended our previous dextrous sticks coordinated 
manipulation system (DeSCom) to be the rail-guided 
DeSCom system. The coordinated manipulation among 
multi-manipulators was performed with concentric movement 
along the rail to improve the manipulation flexibility. The 2D 
microstructure encapsulating cells was fabricated as the 
assembly module. The vision feedback information was 
utilized for the movement control and the automatic pick-up of 
modules with an operation resolution around 30 nm was 
achieved. The assembly of cellular vascular-like microtube 
with outer diameter around 200 ?m was demonstrated based 
on the rail-guided DeSCom manipulation. 
II. RAIL-GUIDED MICROROBOTIC SYSTEM FOR CELLULAR 
STRUCTURE ASSEMBLY 
A. Concept 
The concept to assemble the cellular structure based on 
rail-guided system with dextrous stick coordination 
manipulation is shown in Fig.1. Instead of direct 
micromanipulation of the cells, cells were encapsulated into 
biocompatible hydrogel as 2D microstructure for assembly. 
By creating modular structure, the cell viability during 
manipulation was assured. Through the integration of different 
microstructure shapes with the interaction of 
micromanipulators, the 3D structures with expected 
morphology can be achieved.  To realize the complex 
structures assembly, the microrobotic system needs to 
interfere the assembly task in different positions. The tip of the 
end-effector needs to frequently rotate around the specimen in 
the visual filed for the adjustment and alignment. The 
rail-guided system was designed to achieve the arbitrary 
change of tip posture during manipulation. As shown, the 
manipulators were restricted on the rail. During the moving of 
manipulator stage along the rail, the end-effector achieved the 
concentric motion to rotate the tip around the specimen 
without sweeping out of the visual field. Considering of 
assembly efficiency, the image acquired from the optical 
microscope was utilized for the vision feedback. Through the 
recognition of different assembly tasks, the cooperation 
between end-effectors based on image feedback was 
established.  For the sophisticated assembly task in the future, 
more manipulators as the module can be incorporated into the 
rail-guided microrobotic system to improve the manipulation 
flexibility. 
B. Rail-guided microrobotic systems setup 
As shown in Fig. 2, we developed the integrated Inverted 
Optical Microscope (OM)-microrobotic manipulation system 
to realize the assembly of cellular structure. This system was 
set up with three sub-systems including the rough control, the 
fine control and the vision feedback. The manipulator stages 
were restricted on the rail and driven by the stepping motor 
(model 398867, Maxon Motor Inc.) for the rough control. 
Through the concentric movement derived from the stepping 
motor, the manipulators can move along the rail and the tip of 
end-effector can rotate around the specimen in the visual field 
of OM. For every manipulator on the rail, the piezo motor 
(model 8353, New Focus Inc.) was utilized to realize the fine 
control. Through the driving of three prismatic joints along 
X-Y-Z direction respectively, the micromanipulation 
resolution was around 30 nm. The glass pipette was pulled and 
sputtered with gold as the end-effector of the 
micromanipulator and the dimension of the pipette tip is 
around 10??m. The vision feedback sub-system was 
developed to improve the assembly efficiency. Through the 
processing of image captured from the OM, the distance 
information was utilized for the target location, task 
optimization and finally the automatic pick-up of 2D module 
was achieved. 
C. Cellular 2D module fabrication 
Instead of direct contact with cells, the cells were 
encapsulated into the 2D hydrogel modules for the 
 
Fig. 2 Setup of the rail-guided microrobotic system under OM 
 
 
Fig. 3 On-chip fabrication of 2D cellular assembly module 
 
2814
  
microrobotic assembly of the 3D cellular structures. The size 
of assembled structure can be easily regulated through 
controlling the total number of the 2D hydrogel modules in the 
assembled array. Through the soft-contact between the 
hydrogel and the cells, the cell viability during assembly can 
be assured. 
As shown in Fig. 3, we utilize the microfluidic channel to 
fabricate the 2D modules. The fabrication method is based on 
the sensitometric characteristic of the crosslinkable hydrogel 
[20]. After the exposure with UV light, the cell-mixed 
hydrogel solution can solidify and encapsulate the 
surrounding cells into the structure.  The shape of solidified 
2D module is determined by the profile of exposed UV light. 
To achieve predefined physiological architectures, the UV 
light source was covered with different masks to shape 
different profiles of 2D module. Finally, the 2D modules were 
collected to the buffer solution for the 3D microrobotic 
assembly. 
NIH/3T3 cells as one type of fibroblast forms the outer 
layer of vessel, so we chose it for 2D module fabrication. The 
Poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate (PEGDA, molecular weight 
700, Sigma Aldrich) as one type of crosslinkable hydrogel is 
biocompatible and exhibits mechanical properties similar to 
those soft tissues, so PEGDA was utilized for the 
encapsulation of NIH/3T3 cells for 2D module fabrication. 
Prior to experiment, cells were cultured inside Dulbecco's 
Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM, Sigma Aldrich) with 10% 
Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS, Sigma Aldrich) for 72 hours and 
mixed inside Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS, Wako) to form 
a PBS cell solution of 107/mL cell concentration. The 
experimental solution was formed by 272 ?L PBS cell 
solution, 120 ?L PEGDA, and 8 ?L photoinitiator (Irgacure 
2959, Ciba).  As shown in Fig. 4, after the exposure of UV 
light to the PEGDA, different shapes of 2D module were 
solidified and the NIH/3T3 cells were encapsulated in the 
module. For the assembly of complex architecture, more type 
of cells can be embedded into different 2D shapes. 
III. MICROROBOTIC CONTROL SYSTEM 
A. Immobilization method of the 2D hydrogel module 
To assemble the 3D structure with rail-guided 
microrobotic system, the 2D modules were picked up for 
immobilization, alignment and finally assembled in an array. 
The pick-up motion is derived from the torque   as in Fig. 
5(a). During the press of the glass pipette to the microstructure 
at contact point, the torque increased through the cooperation 
among the pressure  
 
, friction  
 
, gravitational force   and 
support force  
 
. As shown in (1)~(3), to realized the rotation 
of microstructure with enough torque value, the manipulator 
just needs to approach the glass pipette in vertical direction 
with appropriate angle ? to increase the press force. To pick up 
the microstructure with same thickness, the approaching 
distance in vertical direction is a constant. As shown in Fig.5(c) 
and Fig. 5(d), we evaluated the immobilization method 
through the pick-up of hydrogel donuts with glass pipette. 
After the calibration of approaching distance, the pick-up 
success rate can achieve 90%, which is enough for the 
assembly efficiency. 
12
( ) ( )
4
fN
D
M f F h f F ? ? ? ?
                     (1) 
1
sin
p
fF ? ?                                   (2) 
2
cos
p
fF ? ?                                 (3) 
0 0 0 0
( (( ),( )) ( , )) SCR x x y y ROI x y ?? ?? ?
?
           (4) 
B. Image processing for Objects Identification 
The image captured from OM was utilized as the original 
image for the vision feedback system. Through the real-time 
update and processing of image, the distance information was 
sent back for the movement control of the glass pipette.  As 
 
Fig. 4 Fabrication  result of 2D cellular modules 
 
 
Fig. 5 Immobilization method of microstructure assembly. (a) Mechanical 
analysis before immobilization. (b) Rotation of microstructure. (c) 
Experiment evaluation of immobilization method. (d) Rotation of 
microstructure in the experiment. 
 
Fig.6 Flow chart of the microrobotic control system 
 
2815
  
shown in Fig. 6, the feedback control system for 3D structure 
assembly was based on the image processing.  First, the 
real-time image was captured from OM. Then, the glass 
pipette and the 2D modules were identified. The target 
position was set and the current distance was calculated as the 
movement control feedback. During the movement control, 
the image was updated and the new distance was calculated 
again in real-time. Finally, the automatic pick-up of the 2D 
modules based on microrobotic control system was achieved. 
During the image processing, the gray processing and 
binaryzation processing was utilized to reduce the noise as 
shown in Fig. 7(a). Based on the Template matching technique 
in (4), the tip of the glass pipette was taken as the template to 
identify the glass pipette during manipulation. Fig. 7(c) 
showed the template matching result where all the tips of 
pipette were located. Since the shape of 2D module was 
predefined, the Hough Transformation technique was utilized 
to identify the 2D modules. As shown in Fig. 7(b), the eligible 
2D module which was closest to the main-manipulator was 
located. The image processing result was shown in Fig. 7(d). 
The tip point and the center point were defined for distance 
calibration and movement control. According to the 
immobilization method, the moving distance in vertical 
direction was predefined as a constant related to the thickness 
of the 2D module, so finally the automatic pick-up of 2D 
module was achieved with image processing. 
C.  Glass pipette movement control 
The movement of the micromanipulator was controlled by 
the stepping motor and piezo motor. As shown in Fig. 8, every 
micromanipulator configured one revolute joint and three 
prismatic joints. The frame 0 was fixed on the stage. The 
frame 1 was fixed on the revolute joint which can achieve the 
rotate in  
 
 direction derived from the concentric motion of 
the stepping motor along the rail. The frames 2, 3, 4, were 
fixed on the prismatic joint which can translate in their Z 
directions driven by the piezo motors. Frame 5 was the tool 
frame which fixed on the tip of the glass pipette. The product 
of all five link transformation matrix can be described 
according to the Denavit–Hartenberg parameters, which was 
given by: 
11
11 0 0 1 2 3 4
5 1 2 3 4 5
cos sin 0
sin cos 0
0 0 1
0 0 0 1
x
y
z
p
p
T T T T T T
p
??
??
???
??
??
??
??
??
??
??
           (5) 
where 
2 1 3 3 1
( ) sin ( ) cos
x
p R d d L ?? ? ? ? ?
           
 (6) 
2 1 3 3 1
( ) cos ( ) sin
y
p R d L d ?? ?? ? ? ?
          (7) 
1 2 4 z
p L L d ? ? ?                          (8) 
where  
 
 (i=1, 2, 3) was the constant height of piezo motor 
module and  
 
 (x=1~4) was the translational movement of 
every prismatic joint which is variable values. R is the radius 
of the rail. The angle  
 
 was determined by the concentric 
rotation along the rail. It was a constant during the movement 
control of the pipette tip, since the posture of the tip was set by 
the rotation in advance. Thus, the moving of glass pipette in 
X-Y-Z direction can be easily controlled by the piezo motors 
respectively. As shown in Fig. 9, the speed control method 
based on distance was utilized to make the movement control 
intelligent. The tip of the pipette moved at a maximum speed 
when the distance to the target donut was long to reduce the 
movement time. On the contrary, the movement speed 
 
Fig. 7 Image processing result for the rail-guided DeSCom system. (a) 
Binary image to locate the pipette and the 2D module. (b) Blob image after 
the filtering. (c) Location image of all tips of the pipette. (d) Result image 
to set the manipulation start point and end point. 
 
 
Fig. 8 Kinematic analysis and frame alignments for the manipulator  
 
 
Fig. 9 Movement control based on distance between pipette and 2D module 
 
 
Fig. 10 microrobotic assembly strategies for 3D hydrogel structure 
 
2816
  
decreased to a relatively lower value to assure the precise 
when the distance is short. 
D. Assembly strategies integration 
The assembly of the 2D modules to the 3D structures with 
rail-guided microrobotic system is a complex task with several 
manipulation phases. To realize the efficiency and the 
flexibility during assembly, the manipulation strategies for 
different phases were designed. Through the utilization of the 
vision feedback, the mapping between the operation 
environment and the manipulation strategies can be 
established, which can realize the automatic choosing of 
manipulation strategies for different tasks. 
As shown in Fig. 10, we designed 6 modes for the 
assembly of 3D structure. Since the 2D modules were 
prepared in the solution with different postures, the alignment 
mode was utilized to qualify the modules and align the 
qualified modules in an array. After the preparation, the 
micromanipulator repeated the pick-up mode to gather the 
modules on the main-manipulator. During the pick-up, the 
adjustment mode was utilized to adjust the posture of the 
assembled modules. Through several rounds of pick-up, the 
compaction mode was used to move the assembled modules to 
the higher shaft of the pipette with the cooperation between 
sub-manipulators. After the assembly of enough 2D modules, 
the assembled 3D structure was carried to new solution for 
further co-culture. Finally, the release mode realized the 
release of the 3D structure. Through the image processing, the 
state of every manipulator was monitored and the automatic 
switch between different modes were achieved. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT 
After the design of the vision feedback system for 
automatic pick-up in the 3D structures assembly and the 
integration of assembly strategies, we set up the experiment 
to realize the bottom-up assembly of the cellular vascular-like 
microtube with the rail-guided microrobotic system. 
A. Experiment setup 
As shown in Fig. 11, the schematic diagram showed the 
microrobotic assembly of the cellular microtube with the 
cooperation between main-manipulator and sub-manipulators. 
The 2D donuts as the assembly module were prepared in the 
dish. With vision feedback, the automatic pick-up of the 
modules was established. Through the monitoring of the 
assembly state, the microrobotic system switch different 
strategies to adjust the donut posture and compact the 
assembled donuts to make more place on the pipette for new 
donuts. After regulating expected modules on the 
main-manipulator, the secondary crosslinking was utilized to 
connect the donut modules as a whole microtube. After 
changing the buffer solution, the sub-manipulators 
cooperated to release the microtube from the 
main-manipulator. The released microtube can be co-culture 
in the incubator to be the vascular-like tissue. 
B. Assembly of cellular vascular-like microtube 
In the experiment, we demonstrate the vision-based 
assembly of the vascular-like microtube with rail-guided 
microrobotic system. The outer diameter, inner diameter and 
thickness of the fabricated donuts were 200 ?m, 100 ?m, and 
70 ?m respectively. During the assembly, the automatic 
pick-up of the donut was realized according to the glass 
pipette control method. The distance between the tip of the 
main-manipulator and the center of the target donut was used 
 
Fig. 11 Experiment setup for the assembly of vascular-like microtube 
 
 
Fig. 12 microrobotic assembly of cellular vascular-like microtube. (a) 
Alignment of the 2D donuts. (b) Pick-up of donuts. (c), (d) Compaction of 
assembled donuts. (e), (f) Posture adjustment of assembled donuts. (g) 
Release of assembled microtube. (h) Release result. 
 
2817
  
as the feedback in speed control method. As a result, the 
assembly efficiency and the precision were assured. Besides 
the automatic pick-up, the image feedback information was 
also utilized to control the switching of manipulation 
strategies. As shown in Fig. 12(a), the donuts in the visual 
field were aligned by the glass pipette as an array. Donuts 
pick-up was performed once the donuts was aligned. As 
shown in Fig. 12(b) to Fig. 12(f), during the assembly of 
donuts, the manipulation strategies were frequently switched 
from pick-up to adjustment to optimize the posture of 
assembled donuts, or from pick-up compacting to make new 
place for more donuts. After the assembly of enough donuts 
modules and secondary crosslinking, the microtube was 
finally moved to new culture medium and release from the 
main-manipulator. As a result, we fabricated a vascular-like 
microtube encapsulated NIH/3T3 cells inside. The length of 
the tube is around 350 ?m and the diameter is 200 ?m. 
C. Discussion 
Fabrication of cellular structures is very important for the 
tissue engineering. Rail-guided microrobotic system 
combining with vision feedback allows the automatic 
fabrication of cellular structures in bottom-up integration way. 
Through the movement control with image information, the 
high speed assembly of 2D modules can be achieved. The 
efficiency and manipulation accuracy were improved. This 
kind of microrobotic system would benefit the research in 
biological and medical fields. 
In this experiment, we realized the bottom-up fabrication 
of the vascular-like microstructure encapsulating NIH/3T3 
cells inside. The outer diameter of the microtube was around 
200 ?m, which means that the nutrition and oxygen delivery 
can happen between the microtubes like the vessel in the 
tissue. It is meaningful in tissue engineering to fabricate 
complex biological substitute with vascular network.  
Our rail-guided system in this paper achieved the primary 
work for automatic micromanipulation. Only the target 
recognition and target approaching in 3 dimensions during 
pick-up were realized. To achieve the full-automatic 
micromanipulation, a lot of works like the path planning and 
control algorithm still need to be considered. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, a novel rail-guided micromanipulation 
system with multi-manipulators cooperation was proposed 
for the assembly of 3D cellular structures. The 2D hydrogel 
modules encapsulating cells were fabricated for the assembly. 
The concentric movement of the micromanipulator to rotate 
the end-effector around the 2D modules with arbitrary 
posture was achieved. The real-time OM video was captured 
as vision feedback for the movement control of the 
microrobotic system during automatic assembly. The 
assembly of vascular-like microtube was performed to 
demonstrate the working mechanism of the automatic system. 
This rail-guided microrobotic system provides a new concept 
for high efficient micromanipulation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank Hideo MATSUURA at Nagoya University for 
the help during the mechanism design of the robotic system in 
the rail-guided DeSCom system. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. G. Griffith, G. Naughton, “Tissue engineering – current chanllenges 
and expanding opportunities”, Science, 2002, vol.295, pp. 1009-1016. 
[2] S. A. Hacking, A. Khademhosseini, “Applications of microscale 
technologies for regenerative dentistry”, Journal of Dental Research, 
2009, vol. 88, pp. 409-421. 
[3] P. J. Schaner, N. D. Martin, T. N. Tulenko, I. M. Schaner, N. Tarola, R. 
F. Leichter, R. A. Carabasi and P. J. Dimuzio, “Decellularized vein as a 
potential scaffold for vascular tissue engineering”, J. Vasc. Surg., 2004, 
vol. 40, pp. 146-153 
[4] L. E. Niklason, J. Gao, W. M. Abbott, K. K. Hirschi, S. Houser, R. 
Marini and R. Langer, “Functional arteries grown in vitro”, Science, 
1999, vol. 284, pp. 489-493. 
[5] D. G. Seifu,A. Purnama, K. Mequanint, D. Mantovani,  
“Small-diameter vascular tissue engineering”,  Nature Reviews 
Cardiology, 2013, vol. 10, pp. 410-421. 
[6] J. W. Nichol, A. Khademhosseini, “Modular tissue engineering: 
engineering biological tissue from the bottom up”, Soft Matter, 2009, 
vol. 5, pp. 1312-1319. 
[7] N. L’Heureux, S. Paquet, R. Labbe, L. Germain and F. A. Auger, “A 
completely biological tissue-engineered human blood vessel”, FASEB 
J., 1998, vol. 12, pp. 47-56. 
[8] J. T. Borenstein, E.J. Weinberg, B. K. Orrick, C. Sundback, M. R. 
Kaazempurmofrad, and J. P. Vacanti, “Microfabrication of 
three-dimensional engineered scaffolds”, Tissue Engineering, 2007, 
vol. 13, pp. 1837-1844. 
[9] J. Boublik, H. Park, M. Radisic, E. Tognana, F. Chen, M. Pei, G. 
Vunjak-Novakovic and L. E. Freed, “Mechanical properties and 
remodeling of hybrid cardiac constructs made from heart cells, fibrin, 
and biodegradable, elastomeric knitted fabric”, Tissue Engineering, 
2005, vol. 11, pp. 1122-1132. 
[10] Y. Wu, D. Sun, W. Huang, and N. Xi, "Dynamics Analysis and Motion 
Planning for Automated Cell Transportation With Optical Tweezers," 
IEEE-ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 2013, vol. 18, pp. 
706-713. 
[11] T. Yue, M. Nakajima, H. Tajima and Toshio Fukuda, “Fabrication of 
microstructures and embedding controllable particles inside 
dielectrophoretic microfluidic devices”, International Journal of 
Advanced Robotic Systems, 2013, vol. 10, pp103-108. 
[12] Y. N. Du, M. Ghodousi, H. Qi, et al, “Sequential assembly of cell-laden 
hydrogel constructs to engineer vascular-like microchannels”, 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, 2011, vol. 108(7), pp. 1693-1703. 
[13] A. Ramadan, K. Inoue, T. Arai and T. Takubo, “Design optimization of 
a compact 3-DOF parallel micro/nano finger manipulator”, in 
Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2006, pp. 
778-783. 
[14] Y. U. Sun, B. J. Nelson, “Microrobotic cell injection”, Proceedings of 
the IEEE ICRA, 2001, pp. 620-625. 
[15] L. Dezhong, X. Yihua, and F. Renyuan, “Study of an intelligent 
micro-manipulator”, J. Mater. Process. Technol., vol. 139, pp. 77-80. 
[16] A. Menciassi, A. Eisinberg, I. Izzo, P. Dario, “From “macro” to “micro” 
manipulation: models and experiments”, IEEE-ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics, 2004, vol. 9, pp. 311-320. 
[17] A. Ramadan, T. Takubo, K. Oohara, T. Arai, “Developmental process 
of a chopstick-like hybrid-structure two-fingered micromanipulator 
hand for 3-D manipulation of microscopic objects”,  IEEE Transaction 
on Industrial Electronics, 2009, vol. 56, pp. 1121-1135. 
[18] Hong Qiao and S.K.Tso, “Three-step precise robotic peg-hole insertion 
with symmetric regular polyhedral objects”, International Journal of 
Production Research Operation, 1999, vol. 37, pp. 3541-3563. 
[19] H. P. Wang, T. Fukuda, et al “Dextrous stick coordination manipulation 
for 3D hydrogel assembly by dual-nanomanipulator”, Proceedings of 
the IEEE NANO, 2013, pp. 207-212. 
[20] S. E. Chung, W. Park, S. Shin, S. A. Lee, and S. Kwon, "Guided and 
fluidic self-assembly of microstructures using railed microfluidic 
channels," Nat Mater, 2008, vol. 7, pp. 581-7. 
2818
