A Flying Saucer Lifted with Coandÿ a Effect
Seonhye Han
1
, Hyunyong Lee
1
, Hyoju Lee
1
, Jaehyeok Jeon
1
, Choonghan Lee
1
,
Yong Bum Kim
1
, and Hyouk Ryeol Choi
1
AbstractÑ In this work, we present a ßying saucer, a kind of
unmanned aerial vehicle(UA V), lifted based on Coandÿ a effect.
Coandÿ a effect is an interesting ßuid dynamic phenomenon that
the interaction between the ßow and curved surfaces produce
attraction, which results in the lifting of the object. The ßying
saucer adopting Coandÿ a effect is easy to hover while keeping
its posture stable, and vertical take-off and landing(VTOL) is
possible. Its design procedures via optimization and manufac-
turing procedures are explained in details, and the preliminary
tests in the indoor and outdoor are successfully demonstrated.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles(UA Vs) are one of hot issues in
the study of aerial robots. Especially demands on monitoring
for military use and disaster areas have been increasing
rapidly. Therefore rotorcrafts are needed for them.
There are several types of rotorcrafts, such as helicopter,
quadcopter. However, these types need more than two rotors
to control their attitude and direction. On the contrary, the
ßying saucer lifted with Coandÿ a effect needs only one rotor.
It means the saucer can have smaller fuselage and needs less
power consume[1-4]. In this paper, the ßying saucer UA V
was designed and developed with reasonable process.
II. BACKGROUND
Coandÿ a effect is a phenomenon that ßow and curved
surface attract each other when the ßow run on the curved
surface. The force that the ßow pull the surface of ßying
saucer can be called lift force. By this process, suggested
UA V can ßy. Moreover, the ßow also control attitude and
direction of the ßying saucer with ßaps and Þns. Controlling
attitude provide stable posture, hovering and vertical take-off
landing(VTOL).
III. DESIGN
The ßying saucer has curved surface for lift force from
Coandÿ a effect. Flow that is generated by an electric motor
and a propeller run on curved surface of the ßying saucer
through a duct that makes better uniform ßow.
A precondition of good surface is laminar ßow keep to
end of curved surface. To determine optimized design of
the surface, computational ßuid dynamics(CFD) simulation
This research was supported by the MKE (The Ministry of Knowledge
Economy),Korea, under the Next Generation Robot Actuator/Sensor Re-
search Center support program supervise by the NIPA (National IT Industry
Promotion Agency) (H1502-13-1001).
1
They are in the school of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan
University, Korea. hrchoi@me.skku.ac.kr
* All the correpondences are delivered to prof. H. R. Choi at
hrchoi@me.skku.ac.kr.
Fig. 1. A ßying saucer UA V
was done. From the results, horizontal and vertical length of
curved surface are 160mm and 140mm.
The ßying saucer has 4 ßaps to control pitch and roll. Also,
it has 24 Þns to control yawing. Flaps and Þns are operated
by servo motors. Each ßaps and Þns are feedbacked by gyro
sensors to stable its attitude. In case of manual control, Þns
and ßaps are operated by remote controller.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A manufactured ßying saucer UA V consists of several
materials as shown in Fig. 1. First, frame of the saucer
was made of balsa wood, because of UA VÕs weight. Second,
material of curved surface is expanded polypropylene(EPP).
The reasons that the EPP was chosen are its lightness,
elasticity and smooth surface.
In Þeld, the ßying saucer UA V was tested. It worked
normally shown as attached video. It can hover with stable
attitude and be controlled as users wanted.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, ßying saucer unmanned aerial vehicle(UA V)
was developed through reasonable design process. Also its
normal operations were conÞrmed. In the future, the ßying
saucer UA V will have more suitable speciÞcations and func-
tions for front Þeld UA V as outcome of research of our team.
REFERENCES
[1] Gebauer, J. ; Koci, P. ; Sofer, P.,ÓMulticopter potentialitiesÓ, Proceed-
ing of 2012 13th International Carpathian Control Conference (ICCC),
, pp.194-197, 2012. 5
[2] Terry Day, THE COAND EFFECT AND LIFT, the New Fluid
Technology, 2008
[3] Naudin, J.L.,ÓThe GFS UA V projectÓ.
http://jlnlabs.online.fr/gfsuav/index.htm
[4] Ronald Douglas Joslin, Gregory S. Jon, Applications of circulation
control technologies American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronau-
tics, 2006, pp 599-613
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2561
