  
  
AbstractÑSPAL (Single Port Access Laparoscopy) could lead 
to improved surgical outcomes but demands functional and 
effective next-generation surgical tools. Various manual tools 
and robotic assistant systems have been developed in response to 
the unmet needs of SPAL. This paper presents the concept, 
design considerations and experimental characterizations of a 
foldable stereo vision unit with integrated illumination. The 
vision unit can be inserted into the abdomen through a ¯12mm 
trocar in a cylindrical laparoscope form. It can then unfold itself 
into a working configuration, providing 3D visualization of the 
surgical site as well as a remaining access port for manipulation 
arms or surgical tools. Given its standalone features, the vision 
unit could either be used for SPAL in a robotic assistant system 
or be applied in a surgical setting with standard manual tools. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
PAL (Single Port Access Laparoscopy) uses one skin 
incision (usually the umbilicus) for surgical interventions 
[1]. Compared with traditional multi-port laparoscopic MIS 
(Minimally Invasive Surgery), SPAL could further improve 
surgical outcomes in terms of complication rates, 
postoperative pain, hospitalization time and cosmesis in a 
similar clinical setting [2]. Even more recently introduced, 
NOTES (Natural Orifice Translumenal Endoscopic Surgery), 
which only uses a patientÕ natural orifices (such as vagina, GI 
track, etc) for scar-less surgeries [3], could be more tempting 
than SPAL. However, even assisted by the state-of-the-art 
tool instrumentation [4] and robotics technology [5-11], 
NOTES is still quite far from massive clinical trials.  
Equipped with newly developed SPAL tools (e.g. the 
TriPort from Advanced Surgical Concepts, the SILS port 
from Covidien, the RealHand tools from Novare Surgical 
Systems, and the Cambridge Endo instruments), Surgeons 
have found SPAL a viable option over traditional laparoscopy 
[12, 13]. Besides the development of the manual tools, several 
robotic assistant systems were also built in order to ease the 
challenging hand-eye coordination while manipulating the 
curved cross-posed SPAL tools. These robotic systems 
include the stackable four-bar linkage for SPAL [14], the 
¯23mm-port SPAL robot [15], the ¯30mm-port SPAL robot 
[16], the SPAL toolset (a ¯35mm port for a scope, two curved 
tools and one channel) for the da Vinci surgical robot [17], 
and the ¯15mm-port IREP (Insertable Robotic Effector 
 
Manuscript received Sept 15th, 2013. This work is supported in part by 
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51005146 and 
Grant No. 51375295) and in part by the Shanghai Pujiang Scholar Program 
(Grant No. 11PJ1405600). 
The authors are with the RII Lab (Lab of Robotics Innovation and 
Intervention), UM-SJTU Joint Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai, 200240, China (asterisk indicates the corresponding author, phone: 
86-21-34207220; fax: 86-21-34206525; emails: k.xu@sjtu.edu.cn, 
zjr318@sjtu.edu.cn, and zhengchen.dai@sjtu.edu.cn). 
Platform) robot [18, 19]. 
Robotic assistants are intuitive and easy to operate but they 
are often involved with regulatory hurdles and high costs. On 
the other hand, manual SPAL tools are cheaper and prevail 
relatively faster but surgeons need to go through substantial 
trainings to be skilled. This paper hence presents the design of 
a foldable stereo vision unit, which can be integrated into a 
robotic assistant system for SPAL and/or be applied as a 
handheld tool for manual SPAL. The vision unit integrated 
with illumination is shown in Fig. 1. It has a cylindrical 
laparoscope form with a diameter of 12mm. In this form it can 
be inserted into abdomen through a standard trocar. The 
vision unit can then unfold itself into a working configuration, 
providing a remaining access port and 3D visualization of the 
surgical site. Robotic manipulation arms or manual tools can 
then be deployed via this remaining port.  
 
Fig. 1. The foldable stereo vision unit for SPAL 
A similar work can be found in [20], where a magnetically 
anchored ¯22mm 3D vision unit was developed for SPAL. 
Several distinctive features are presented by this paper, which 
forms the main contributions of this work. The distinctive 
features include i) the use of a continuum arm, and ii) a 
camera pivoting mechanism. The continuum arm allows easy 
positioning and overarching of the vision unit to avoid 
collisions with the inserted tools. The camera pivoting 
mechanism enables the deployment of two ¯7.8mm camera 
heads through a ¯12mm trocar.  
The paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the 
design goals and Section III presents considerations and 
detailed descriptions of the vision unit. Since the major 
contribution of this paper is the mechanical design of this 
stereo vision unit, the experimental characterization as in 
Section IV follows existing conventional methods. The 
conclusions are followed in Section V. 
II. DESIGN GOALS AND OVERVIEW 
Motivated by the increasing demands for SPAL, this paper 
A Foldable Stereo Vision Unit for Single Port Access Laparoscopy 
Kai Xu*, Member, IEEE, Jiangran Zhao, Student Member, IEEE, and Zhengchen Dai 
S
The remaining port
Pivoting 
mechanism
Continuum 
arm 
LED
The folded cylindrical form 
with an OD of 12mm 
Vision 
cylinder 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4182
  
proposes to design a foldable stereo vision unit applicable 
both in a robotic surgical system and as a handheld device for 
manual operations.  
When the vision unit is in its folded configuration, it can be 
inserted into abdomen through a skin incision (usually the 
umbilicus). After insertion, the vision unit can unfold itself 
into a working configuration, providing a remaining access 
port and 3D visualization of the surgical site.  
The vision unit could be used as a handheld device as 
shown in Fig. 2(a). The access port shall be big enough to 
pass a standard ablation tool (e.g. the 5mm Ethicon Harmonic 
scalpel) and/or for water/gas sources. Two needle-like 
laparoscopic tools (e.g. the Stryker MiniLap tools or the Karl 
Storz Mini-Laparoscopy tools) can be inserted into the 
abdomen for tissue manipulations. The vision unit could also 
be applied in a robotic surgical system as shown in Fig. 2(b). 
Two robotic manipulators with grippers or cautery tips could 
be inserted from the access port to perform surgical tasks.  
 
Fig. 2. Two possible application concepts for this vision unit: (a) as a 
handheld device for manual SPAL, or (b) in a robotic surgical system 
Taking into consideration the applicable scenarios of this 
vision unit, the prototype is shown in Fig. 1. Distinct features 
of this design can be highlighted as follows. 
¥ The vision unit only has an outer diameter of 12mm in its 
folded cylindrical form. This is inspired by the 12mm 
endoscopic robot in which the access port is big enough 
for two 5-DoF continuum manipulators [10, 11]. 
¥ The camera pivoting mechanism enables the deployment 
of two ¯7.8mm camera heads one by one through a 
¯12mm trocar. Using two relatively big camera heads 
could lead to better image quality. 
¥ The optimal imaging distance from the objects to the 
vision unit shall be between 100mm to 150mm.  
¥ The continuum arm for orienting and positioning of the 
vision unit has three DoFs (Degrees of Freedom). The two 
segments could be bent independently and the proximal 
segment can be extended from the arm entrance port. 
¥ LEDs are integrated for illumination. 
Section III presents the design considerations and the 
components descriptions, including the selection and 
arrangement of the camera heads, the design of the camera 
pivoting mechanism, dimension synthesis of the continuum 
arm, etc. Experimental characterization of this vision unit will 
be presented in Section IV. 
III. CONSIDERATIONS AND DESCRIPTIONS 
This stereo vision unit mainly consists of the vision 
cylinder with two camera heads, the camera pivoting 
mechanism, the continuum arm and the LED illumination. 
These components will be described in detail. 
A. Camera selection and arrangement 
Camera selection is critical for a vision unit. After carefully 
checking the available products of the major suppliers of 
miniature camera heads, MO-B3506 from the MISUMI 
Electronics Corp is picked. This camera head has an outer 
diameter of 7.8mm and a length of 7.5mm as shown in Fig. 
3(c). The resolution is 640?480 with an S/N (signal over 
noise) ratio of 50dB and a minimally required illumination of 
0.1 Lux. Although there are camera heads at smaller sizes, 
they either have a lower resolution, a poorer S/N ratio, or 
demand higher illumination. 
The design goal is to design a stereo vision unit compact 
enough to pass through a ¯12mm trocar. Due to the 7.8mm 
diameter of the camera head, a serial arrangement of the two 
camera heads had to be used. While putting the camera head 
axially with the vision cylinder, a mirror is used to reflect the 
images. Using a mirror is equivalent to orienting the camera 
towards a radial direction. 
As shown in Fig. 3(a), a back-to-back arrangement was 
firstly tested. This arrangement generates a baseline distance 
of 46mm between the two equivalent cameras. However 
when objects are at the desired viewing distances of between 
100mm to 150mm, this is similar to putting objects too close 
to human eyes. The stereo images from the two camera heads 
look unnatural and donÕt trigger a 3D perception. 
 
Fig. 3. Camera arrangement of the vision cylinder: (a) the back-to-back 
arrangement and (b) the face-to-face arrangement 
Hence a face-to-face arrangement is then tested as shown 
in Fig. 3(b) with a more detailed diagram shown in Fig. 4. The 
distance between the two cameras is 20mm and the distance 
between the mirror centers is 11mm. If the angle between the 
two mirrors is 90¼, the axes of the two equivalent camera 
heads are parallel. By adjusting the angle 
1
? between the two 
mirrors, the angle 
2
? between the axes of the two equivalent 
camera heads can be changed according to the geometrical 
relation in Eq. (1). A series of experiments were carried out to 
determine what 
2
? value is the best to trigger 3D perception 
for human. As shown in Fig. 4(c), a few plastic frames made 
from 3D printing were used to hold the cameras in equivalent 
positions for different  
2
? values. The anaglyph views were 
Camera direction
() b
() a
MO-B3506 
camera head
() c
Mirror Vision cylinder 
() a
() b
Stryker MiniLap tools
Ethicon Harmonic scalpel
The vision unit 
Robotic manipulators 
The vision unit
4183
  
presented to 5 human subjects for them to vote which one 
looked the most natural. The one with 
1
92 ?=¡ was chosen. 
 
21
2180 ?? =? ¡  (1) 
 
Fig. 4. Determine the camera arrangement: (a) parallel equivalent camera 
axes, (b) crossed equivalent camera axes, and (c) experiments to decide 
1
? 
B. Camera pivoting mechanism 
Due to the face-to-face serial arrangement of the two 
camera heads, a pivoting mechanism is needed to rotate the 
vision cylinder for 90¼ to generate normal stereo images. 
As shown in Fig. 5, the vision cylinder will be driven to 
rotate about the pivoting screw to transform the vision unit 
from the cylindrical form into the working configuration. 
The actuation block can be driven to move back and forth 
along the guiding pin in the slot. Enveloping shape of the 
actuation block is trimmed to guarantee that everything is 
within the ¯12mm cylindrical shape when the vision unit is 
fully folded. The actuation block is driven by a ¯0.4mm 
actuation rod made from NiTi (nickel-titanium alloy) in a 
push-pull mode. The driving pin is attached to the vision 
cylinder and it can slide inside a slot of the actuation block. 
When the actuation block is actuated by the actuation rod to 
move back and forth, it pushes the driving pin to rotate the 
vision cylinder from the pose as in Fig. 5(a) to Fig. 5(c). 
 
Fig. 5. Camera pivoting mechanism: (a) ~ (c) unfolding poses and (d) the 
shape and arrangement of the flexible PCB strips 
Besides realizing the desired unfolding motion of the 
vision cylinder, attention was also paid to the wiring of the 
two camera heads. Flexible PCB strips were used to replace 
the camerasÕ original wires in order to make sure they will not 
get tangled. As shown in Fig. 5(d), the flexible PCB strips 
were carefully routed and patterned to allow the rotation of 
the vision cylinder. 
C. Structure and dimensions of the continuum arm 
Referring to Fig. 1, the continuum arm is used to position 
and orient the vision unit. As shown in Fig. 6, the continuum 
arm consists of a super-elastic NiTi strip, a fixation ring, 
spacers and actuation rods. 
A fixation ring is rigidly attached to the NiTi strip in the 
middle of the strip. The portion of the NiTi strip from the 
fixation ring to the arm entrance port is referred to as segment 
#1. The actuation rod is attached to the fixation ring and can 
slide in the holes of the spacers. Pulling of the actuation rod 
would bend the segment upwards.  
The portion of the NiTi strip between the vision unit and 
segment #1 is referred to as segment #2. Another actuation 
rod is attached to the vision unit and can slide in the holes of 
the spacers. Pushing this actuation rod, which is routed 
through segment #1, would bend segment #2 downwards. 
Hence there are 3 DoFs for the continuum arm: 2 DoFs for 
bending and 1 DoF for the translational feed of segment #1. 
Bent shapes of the segments #1 and #2 are assumed to be 
circular arcs according to the previous studies [21-23]. This 
assumption will be verified by the experiments in Section 
IV.B. Following this assumption, a dimension synthesis could 
be performed to determine the desired lengths of the segments. 
The desired viewing distance is 100mm to 150mm from the 
arm entrance as shown in Fig. 7. Segment #1 is also assumed 
to undergo a 90¼ bending. Then the following geometrical 
relations can be derived. 
 
()
12
2
1cos
LL
OC ?
¹?
=+ ?  (2) 
 
12
2
sin
LL
BC ?
¹?
=+  (3) 
 
12
2 cos
cos
tan sin
LL BC
CD
?
?
?¹ ? ?
== +  (4) 
 
12
2 cos
1
sin
LL
OD OC CD
?
¹??
??
=+ = + +
??
??
  (5) 
If the bending range of segment #2 is from 0¼ to 90¼, it is 
desired for the viewing direction to point towards the center 
of the viewing range when 45 ?=¡ . Then Eq. (5) gives: 
 
()
12
4
125 OD L L mm
¹
=+ ?  (6) 
There are many combinations of 
1
L and 
2
L which satisfy 
Eq. (6). 
1
60 Lmm = and 
2
40 Lmm = are finally decided for 
this viewing configuration. Since 
1
60 Lmm = , the travel of 
the translational DoF of the continuum arm shall be big 
enough to allow this. 
D. Integrated illumination 
Making use of all the available space, eight LEDs were 
originally planned for the illumination as shown in Fig. 8(a). 
Flexible PCBs were planned to wire the LEDs as in Fig. 8(d).  
The two LEDs at Area #2 were not used due to the 
difficulty of fixing them in position under the disturbances 
Guiding pin 
() a
Actuation 
block 
Pivoting screw 
Actuation rod 
Driving pin 
() b () c
Vision 
cylinder 
() d
FlexPCB
Camera head 
() a
1
?
2
?
() b
Mirror 
Equivalent camera 
() c
1
93 ?=¡
1
92 ?=¡
1
91 ?=¡
4184
  
from the camerasÕ flexible PCB strips. The arrangement of 
the camerasÕ PCB strips is shown in Fig. 5(d). 
 
Fig. 6. Structure of the continuum arm 
 
Fig. 7. Dimension synthesis of the continuum arm 
Temperature rise is always a concern when LEDs are used 
for illumination. Two strips were prepared and tested for the 
potential heating problem. Referring to Fig. 8(a) and (d), six 
LEDs and four LEDs are soldered to the PCB strip 
respectively. Temperatures of the LEDs were measured when 
the LEDs were powered at different voltages in open air under 
room temperature. The testing results are listed in Table I. 
 
Fig. 8. LED arrangement and illumination brightness with LEDs powered 
at (a) 2.50v, (b) 2.60v and (c) 2.70v; (d) Flexible PCBs for LEDs 
The LEDÕs rated voltage is 2.95 volts. It can be seen from 
the testing results that using the LEDs at 2.95 volts will cause 
heating problems no matter whether six or four LEDs are 
used. The LEDs have to be used at a lower voltage, such as 
2.70 volts. It was then decided that six LEDs would be used, 
as in Fig. 8(a). The maximal supply voltage is 2.70 volts. 
Experimental results in Section IV.D would present a 
qualitative sense whether these LEDs are bright enough. 
TABLE I 
LED HEATING TESTS 
LED Qty Voltage (V) Time (min) Temperature (¼C) 
6 
2.95 
7 126 
20 105 
30 96 
2.70 
2 38 
10 36 
30 33 
4 2.95 
5 72 
15 99 
30 72 
 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL CHARACTERIZATION 
After the vision unit is fabricated and assembled, a series of 
experiments were performed to characterize the features of 
this foldable stereo vision unit.  
A. Deployment 
This foldable vision unit shall be inserted into abdomen in 
a cylindrical form. Then it unfolds itself to provide 
visualization. This deployment process shall be verified first. 
The deployment is shown in Fig. 9: (a) the vision unit 
started the process from a cylindrical form whose diameter is 
12 mm; (b) then the continuum arm was extended from the 
entrance to allow enough length of segment #1; (c) segment 
#1 was bent upwards by pulling one NiTi actuation rod; (d) 
segment #2 was then bent downwards by pushing the other 
actuation rod; the camera cylinder was also actuated to rotate 
about the pivot point; (e) when the segments were bent to the 
desired shapes, LEDs were powered on and stereo visual 
feeds were streamed. 
 
Fig. 9. Deployment of the foldable vision unit 
B. Bending shape identification 
The dimension determination of the continuum arm in 
Section III.C is based on an assumption that both segments 
will be bent into circular shapes. Shape identification 
experiments were hence carried out to verify this assumption. 
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 10. An optical 
tracker (Micron Tracker SX60, Claron Technology Inc.) with 
a pointing tool was used. The pointing tool was pointed at 
various points along the continuum arm. The tracker 
recognized the markers of the pointing tool and directly 
() b
() c
() a
() d () e
Area #2 for two LEDs 
() b
() c
() a
() d
Area #1 for 
six LEDs 
ö x
ö y
1
L
2
L
A
B
Segment #2 
Segment #1 
Arm 
entrance 
?
D O
B
C
Viewing direction 
of equivalent 
camera heads 
2
r
Desired viewing 
range
Segment #2 
Segment #1 
Spacers 
Actuation rod 
for the vision 
cylinder 
Actuation rod for 
segment #2 
Actuation 
rod for 
segment #1 
Fixation 
ring 
NiTi strip 
Arm entrance port
Screw micrometers 
for camera pivot 
and bending of 
segments #1 & #2
Translational feed 
to extend and  
retract segment #1
4185
  
provided coordinates of the toolÕs tip. 
 
Fig. 10. The experiments for shape identification of the continuum arm 
The coordinates of the points along the continuum arm 
under various poses were recorded, transformed to the frame 
{ }
öö , x y as defined in Fig. 7, and plotted in Fig.11. A circular 
arc connected with a straight line segment was used to 
approximate two poses in Fig. 11, when segment #2 was not 
bent. Then two connected circular arcs are used to 
approximate the other two poses in Fig. 11. From the 
experimental results, it can be seen that the actual shapes of 
the continuum arms can be well approximated by two 
connecting circular arcs. 
 
Fig. 11. Shape identification of the continuum arm 
C. Camera calibration and 3D reconstruction  
In order to use the stereo vision unit for surgical tool 
tracking and 3D reconstruction, the camera heads shall be 
calibrated. The implemented calibration process used the 
Camera Calibration Toolbox for Matlab
¨
 developed by 
Jean-Yves Bouguet using existing algorithms [24, 25]. As 
shown in Fig. 12(a), a series of pictures were taken of a 
calibration board with known grid sizes. The corners were 
extracted and the detection was iterated to obtain the 
distortion correction coefficients. The distortion can be 
visualized as in Fig. 12(b). The calibration was repeated for 
both cameras. The focal lengths, the principal points, the 
skew coefficient and the distortion coefficients were all 
obtained. The position and orientation of the right camera 
with respect to the left camera were also calibrated. 
Then the stereo vision unit was tested for 3D reconstruction. 
The scene is shown in Fig. 13(a). Three blocks were put on a 
white background. Three extractable cross markers were 
printed on the background so that a local frame { }
ö ö ,
ll
x y can 
be easily defined. Correspondences of the blocksÕ corners 
were manually established. The position errors of these points 
are all between 0.5 mm to 1.2 mm. 
 
Fig. 12. Camera calibration: (a) pictures taken of a calibration board and (b) 
visualization of the distortion 
 
Fig. 13. 3D construction using the calibrated stereo vision unit: (a) the 
original and (b) the reconstructed scenes 
D. Ex-vivo trial of the vision unit 
The stereo vision was also tested in an ex-vivo trial. As 
shown in Fig. 14(a), a box was used to mimic an abdomen 
under pneumoperitoneum and the vision unit was deployed. 
Using the six LEDs powered at 2.7 volts, the scene was 
successfully visualized. The assembled anaglyph view is 
shown in Fig. 14(b). 
 
Fig. 14. Ex-vivo trials: (a) the setup and (b) the assembled anaglyph view 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presents the concept, design considerations and 
experimental characterizations of a foldable stereo vision unit 
with integrated illumination. It is possible to use this vision 
unit either in a robotic assistant system for SPAL or in a 
surgical setting using manual tools. 
The vision unit features a foldable design. It can be inserted 
into abdomen through a ¯12mm trocar in a cylindrical form. 
Then it can unfold itself into a working configuration, 
providing 3D visualization of the surgical site as well as a 
remaining access port for robotic arms or surgical tools.  
A series of experiments demonstrated its deployability, 
identified the shapes of the continuum arm, reconstructed a 
3D scene with satisfactory accuracy and visualized a mockup 
surgical site using its integrated illumination.  
The future work will mainly focus on improving the 
packaging of the current prototype in order to improve the 
reliability, sterilizability, etc.  
() a
() b
-20
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
50
100
-10
0
10
20
30
Y Axis (mm)
X Axis (mm)
Z Axis (mm)
() a () b
ö
l
x
ö
l
y
() a () b
0 20 40 60 80 100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
X Axis (mm)
Y Axis (mm)
 
 
Both segment as 
circular arcs 
Segment I as a circular 
arc and Segment II as a 
line segment 
The SX60 tracker 
The continuum arm 
The pointing tool
4186
  
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Navarra, E. Pozza, S. Occhionorelli, P. Carcoforo, and I. 
Donini, "One-Wound Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy," 
British Journal of Surgery, vol. 84, No.5, p. 695, 1997. 
[2] E. R. Podolsky, L. St. John-Dillon, S. A. King, and P. G. 
Curcillo II, "Reduced Port Surgery: An Economical, 
Ecological, Educational, and Efficient Approach to 
Development of Single Port Access Surgery," Surgical 
Technology International, No.20, pp. 41-46, Oct 2010. 
[3] A. N. Kalloo, V. K. Singh, S. B. Jagannath, H. Niiyama, S. L. 
Hill, C. A. Vaughn, C. A. Magee, and S. V. Kantsevoy, 
"Flexible Transgastric Peritoneoscopy: a Novel Approach to 
Diagnostic and Therapeutic Interventions in the Peritoneal 
Cavity," Gastrointestinal Endoscopy, vol. 60, No.1, pp. 
114-117, July 2004. 
[4] B. Hu, S. Chung, L. C. L. Sun, K. Kawashima, T. Yamamoto, 
P. B. Cotton, C. J. Gostout, R. H. Hawes, A. N. Kalloo, S. V. 
Kantsevoy, and P. J. Pasricha, "Eagle Claw II: a Novel 
Endosuture Device that Uses a Curved Needle for Major 
Arterial Bleeding: a Bench Study," Gastrointestinal 
Endoscopy, vol. 62, No.2, pp. 266-270, 2005. 
[5] D. J. Abbott, C. Becke, R. I. Rothstein, and W. J. Peine, 
"Design of an Endoluminal NOTES Robotic System," in 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS), San Diego, CA, USA, 2007, pp. 410 - 416. 
[6] S. J. Phee, S. C. Low, Z. L. Sun, K. Y. Ho, W. M. Huang, and 
Z. M. Thant, "Robotic System for No-Scar Gastrointestinal 
Surgery," The International Journal of Medical Robotics and 
Computer Assisted Surgery, vol. 4, No.1, pp. 15-22, March 
2008. 
[7] A. C. Lehman, J. Dumpert, N. A. Wood, L. Redden, A. Q. 
Visty, S. Farritor, B. Varnell, and D. Oleynikov, "Natural 
Orifice Cholecystectomy using a Miniature Robot," Surgical 
Endoscopy, vol. 23, No.2, pp. 260-266, Feb 2009. 
[8] G. Tortora, A. Dimitracopoulos, P. Valdastri, A. Menciassi, 
and P. Dario, "Design of Miniature Modular in vivo Robots for 
Dedicated Tasks in Minimally Invasive Surgery," in 
IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), Budapest, Hungary, 2011, pp. 
327-332. 
[9] K. Xu, J. Zhao, J. Geiger, A. J. Shih, and M. Zheng, "Design of 
an Endoscopic Stitching Device for Surgical Obesity 
Treatment Using a N.O.T.E.S Approach," in IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems 
(IROS), San Francisco, CA, USA, 2011, pp. 961-966. 
[10] K. Xu, J. Zhao, and A. J. Shih, "Development of an 
Endoscopic Continuum Robot to Enable Transgastric Surgical 
Obesity Treatment," in International Conference on 
Intelligent Robotics and Applications (ICIRA) Montreal, 
Quebec, Canada, 2012, pp. 589-600. 
[11] J. Zhao, X. Zheng, M. Zheng, A. J. Shih, and K. Xu, "An 
Endoscopic Continuum Testbed for Finalizing System 
Characteristics of a Surgical Robot for NOTES Procedures," 
in IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced 
Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM), Wollongong, Australia, 2013, 
pp. 63-70. 
[12] J. R. Romanelli and D. B. Earle, "Single-Port Laparoscopic 
Surgery: an Overview," Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 23, No.7, pp. 
1419-1427, April 2009. 
[13] P. P. Rao, P. P. Rao, and S. Bhagwat, "Single-incision 
Laparoscopic Surgery - Current Status and Controversies," 
Journal of Minimal Access Surgery, vol. 7, No.1, pp. 6-16, 
2011. 
[14] H. Lee, Y. Choi, and B.-J. Yi, "Stackable 4-BAR Manipulators 
for Single Port Access Surgery," IEEE/ASME Transaction on 
Mechatronics, vol. 17, No.1, pp. 157-166, Feb 2012. 
[15] M. Piccigallo, U. Scarfogliero, C. Quaglia, G. Petroni, P. 
Valdastri, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, "Design of a Novel 
Bimanual Robotic System for Single-Port Laparoscopy," 
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 15, No.6, pp. 
871-878, Dec 2010. 
[16] Y. Sekiguchi, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Tomono, H. Watanabe, K. 
Toyoda, K. Konishi, M. Tomikawa, S. Ieiri, K. Tanoue, M. 
Hashizume, and M. G. Fujie, "Development of a Tool 
Manipulator Driven by a Flexible Shaft for Single Port 
Endoscopic Surgery," in IEEE / RAS-EMBS International 
Conference on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics 
(BIOROB), Tokyo, Japan, 2010, pp. 120-125. 
[17] G.-P. Haber, M. A. White, R. Autorino, P. F. Escobar, M. D. 
Kroh, S. Chalikonda, R. Khanna, S. Forest, B. Yang, F. 
Altunrende, R. J. Stein, and J. H. Kaouk, "Novel Robotic da 
Vinci Instruments for Laparoendoscopic Single-site Surgery," 
Urology, vol. 76, No.6, pp. 1279-1282, Dec 2010. 
[18] K. Xu, R. E. Goldman, J. Ding, P. K. Allen, D. L. Fowler, and 
N. Simaan, "System Design of an Insertable Robotic Effector 
Platform for Single Port Access (SPA) Surgery," in IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems 
(IROS), St. Louis, MO, USA, 2009, pp. 5546-5552. 
[19] J. Ding, R. E. Goldman, K. Xu, P. K. Allen, D. L. Fowler, and 
N. Simaan, "Design and Coordination Kinematics of an 
Insertable Robotic Effectors Platform for Single-Port Access 
Surgery," IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18, 
No.5, pp. 1612-1624, Oct 2013. 
[20] M. Simi, M. Silvestri, C. Cavallotti, M. Vatteroni, P. Valdastri, 
A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, "Magnetically Activated 
Stereoscopic Vision System for Laparoendoscopic Single-Site 
Surgery," IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18, 
No.3, pp. 1140-1151, June 2013. 
[21] K. Xu and N. Simaan, "An Investigation of the Intrinsic Force 
Sensing Capabilities of Continuum Robots," IEEE 
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 24, No.3, pp. 576-587, June 
2008. 
[22] K. Xu and N. Simaan, "Analytic Formulation for the 
Kinematics, Statics and Shape Restoration of Multibackbone 
Continuum Robots via Elliptic Integrals," Journal of 
Mechanisms and Robotics, vol. 2, Feb 2010. 
[23] R. J. Webster and B. A. Jones, "Design and Kinematic 
Modeling of Constant Curvature Continuum Robots: A 
Review " International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29, 
No.13, pp. 1661-1683, Nov 2010. 
[24] Z. Zhang, "Flexible Camera Calibration by Viewing a Plane 
from Unknown Orientations," in IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Kerkyra, 1999, pp. 
666-673. 
[25] R. Y. Tsai, "A Versatile Camera Calibration Technique for 
High Accuracy 3D Machine Vision Metrology Using 
Off-the-Shelf TV Cameras and Lenses," IEEE Journal of 
Robotics and Automation, vol. 3, No.4, pp. 323-344, 1987. 
 
 
4187
