 
  
Abstract— Minimally invasive Surgery (MIS) is one of the 
most challenging fields for robot designers due to the limited 
size of the access points, to the high miniaturization level and to 
the dexterity needed for performing surg
reason, the integration of actuators should proceed in parallel 
with the identification of the most effective transmission 
mechanisms and kinematics. Conversely, only a few 
microfabrication technologies are adequate for developing 
small size mechanisms with safe operation in the human body.
In this paper a SMA actuated, miniaturized, origami
parallel structure is presented as a versatile module for novel 
robotic tool in MIS, the parallel structure has been combined 
with a twisting module and a gripper obtaining a 
board actuated end-effector. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is considered nowadays 
one of the most promising trends for surgical procedures, 
MIS aims to minimize the access and the 
interactions with the body and to focus on the interventional 
area by deploying surgical instruments through harmless 
paths. 
By following these guidelines, minimally invasive techniques 
relieve post-operative pain, shorten hospital stays, improv
cosmetics and decrease morbidity [1]. 
However, the execution of procedures with the
is very challenging due to the high dexterity needed to 
perform surgical tasks and being limited
stability of current surgical tools passing through
access points [2]. 
For these reasons, in order to satisfy MIS constraints,
surgical instruments, tools and robotic platforms are under 
continuous development and receive much attention
particular, surgical robots are evolving in order to be 
efficiently delivered in the interventional area 
the high dexterity, [3], [4]. 
 
* Research supported by the by the STIFF-FLOP project 
European Communities Seventh Framework Programme under grant 
agreement 287728 and by TOMSY project grant from the European 
Communities Seventh Framework Programme under grant 
270436.  
M. Salerno is with The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Pisa 56127 ITALY (phone: 0039-050883017; fax: 0039
402; e-mail: m.salerno@sssup.it).  
K. Zhang is with the CORE, King’s College London, Strand, London, 
WC2R 2LS United Kingdom (phone: 0044
ketao.zhang@kcl.ac.uk).  
A. Menciassi is with The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola Superiore
Sant’Anna, Pisa 56127 ITALY (e-mail: a.menciassi@sssup.it
J. S. Dai. is with the CORE, King’s College London, Strand, London, 
WC2R 2LS United Kingdom (e-mail: jian.dai@kcl.ac.uk).
A Novel 4-DOFs Origami 
Robotic End-
M. Salerno, Student Member, IEEE
Minimally invasive Surgery (MIS) is one of the 
most challenging fields for robot designers due to the limited 
size of the access points, to the high miniaturization level and to 
the dexterity needed for performing surgical tasks. For this 
reason, the integration of actuators should proceed in parallel 
with the identification of the most effective transmission 
mechanisms and kinematics. Conversely, only a few 
microfabrication technologies are adequate for developing 
l size mechanisms with safe operation in the human body. 
In this paper a SMA actuated, miniaturized, origami-enabled, 
parallel structure is presented as a versatile module for novel 
, the parallel structure has been combined 
ing module and a gripper obtaining a 4-DOFs on 
 
Minimally invasive surgery (MIS) is considered nowadays 
one of the most promising trends for surgical procedures, 
access and the mechanical 
interactions with the body and to focus on the interventional 
deploying surgical instruments through harmless 
ollowing these guidelines, minimally invasive techniques 
operative pain, shorten hospital stays, improve 
with the MIS approach 
is very challenging due to the high dexterity needed to 
limited the mobility and 
of current surgical tools passing through small size 
to satisfy MIS constraints, novel 
ls and robotic platforms are under 
and receive much attention. In 
particular, surgical robots are evolving in order to be 
efficiently delivered in the interventional area thus providing 
FLOP project grant from the 
enth Framework Programme under grant 
grant from the European 
enth Framework Programme under grant agreement 
is with The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola Superiore 
050883017; fax: 0039-050883 
K. Zhang is with the CORE, King’s College London, Strand, London, 
phone: 0044-2078482428; e-mail: 
A. Menciassi is with The BioRobotics Institute of Scuola Superiore 
a.menciassi@sssup.it). 
J. S. Dai. is with the CORE, King’s College London, Strand, London, 
mail: jian.dai@kcl.ac.uk). 
Figure 1.  4 DOFs origami enabled SMA actuated miniaturized
effector. Real prototype and system components (
system DOFs (rigth). 
Recent achievements are represented by 
robots [5] and by modular/snake
very high dexterity due to their high number of degrees of 
freedom (DoFs). 
In these systems, modularity 
actuation allows a good miniaturization level
furthermore these platforms 
employed in different anatomical districts for a variety of 
pathologies requiring different access points 
Following the indications provided by leading users (i.e.
medical doctors and surgeons) about design and introduction 
of robots in the operative room, miniaturization, low weight 
and small footprint should be the main features of new 
generations of surgical robots
Unfortunately, miniaturization and lack of adequate actuation 
and transmission mechanisms usually lead to simplification 
of the system thus reducing its dexterity,
end-effector (the most distal component of the robot
Defining a tradeoff between mechanism complexity and 
platform miniaturization is quite challenging; for this reason 
snake-like modular robots represent an attractive solution
[10] since they compensate limited complexity of a simple 
module with redundancy of many modules.
Alternative actuation strategies, respect to externally actuated 
cables and NiTi backbones, 
example embedding the actuators inside the robot body (on
board), the platform footprint is reduced and the need of 
transmission elements running in the whole robot structure is 
minimized [4], [9]. In addition to miniaturization and distal 
actuation, the trend to minimize patient trauma led some 
research groups in designing minimal access robots that are 
intrinsically safe. These robots, composed by soft structures 
DOFs Origami Enabled, SMA Actuated
-effector for Minimally Invasive Surgery
Student Member, IEEE, K. Zhang, Member, IEEE, A. Menciassi, 
 and J. S. Dai, Member, IEEE 
 
 
 
4 DOFs origami enabled SMA actuated miniaturized end-
and system components (left), 3D design and 
Recent achievements are represented by steerable concentric 
snake-like robots that can provide 
very high dexterity due to their high number of degrees of 
In these systems, modularity combined with cable or rod 
actuation allows a good miniaturization level, [6]; 
 are quite flexible and can be 
employed in different anatomical districts for a variety of 
pathologies requiring different access points [7], [8]. 
ollowing the indications provided by leading users (i.e. 
medical doctors and surgeons) about design and introduction 
of robots in the operative room, miniaturization, low weight 
footprint should be the main features of new 
 [9]. 
Unfortunately, miniaturization and lack of adequate actuation 
and transmission mechanisms usually lead to simplification 
of the system thus reducing its dexterity, especially at the 
effector (the most distal component of the robot [9]). 
Defining a tradeoff between mechanism complexity and 
platform miniaturization is quite challenging; for this reason 
like modular robots represent an attractive solution 
since they compensate limited complexity of a simple 
module with redundancy of many modules. 
Alternative actuation strategies, respect to externally actuated 
cables and NiTi backbones, have some advantages; for 
example embedding the actuators inside the robot body (on-
board), the platform footprint is reduced and the need of 
transmission elements running in the whole robot structure is 
In addition to miniaturization and distal 
actuation, the trend to minimize patient trauma led some 
research groups in designing minimal access robots that are 
intrinsically safe. These robots, composed by soft structures 
Actuated, 
Minimally Invasive Surgery 
A. Menciassi, Member, IEEE    
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2844
 
embedding compliant actuators, would adapt their shape to 
the environment in order to safely interact with human 
anatomy during both deployment and operation tasks 
the employment of muscle-like actuators such as shape 
memory alloys (SMA) or flexible fluidic actuation can 
preserve platform inherent compliance as d
design of robots mimicking biological soft structures
In recent years, emerging fabrication techniques have 
demonstrated their efficiency in the development of 
miniaturized soft robotic systems preserving 
integrated in more complex system. These techniques carry 
many advantages in terms of reduced wirings (i.e. electrical 
connections, sensors and actuators can be embedded in the 
structure as part of the fabrication process), fabrication 
accuracy and small scale efficiency [13]
Composite Microstructure (SCM) fabrication method takes 
advantage of the high accuracy obtainable by 2D laser cut to 
define planar structure that can be folded for generating 3D 
complex structures [14]. Based on this consideration, origami 
represents a source of inspiration in miniaturized system 
design due to their capability to replicate complex joints 
behavior [15]. Origami structures are quite cost effective 
when fabricated with SCM technique and they are ideal for 
small scale (<cm) applications where surface effects 
dominate: multi components joints are inefficient and too 
complex to realize, while 3D arrangements of rigid planes 
and flexible hinges can provide equivalent constraints 
[15]. 
From the actuation point of view, SMA represents one of the 
most widely employed technologies in medical instruments 
[16] due to their unique pseudoelastic features and shape 
recovery capabilities. Further, in addition to p
pneumatic or hydraulic actuation systems 
common due to their high speed and frequency actuation
capabilities, SMA actuators are one of the preferred 
technologies in magnetic resonance imaging (
compatible instruments and robots [17]. 
SMAs allow the design of very compact and compliant 
actuators with a very high power-to-weight ratio
performances can be tuned by annealing the alloy in different 
shapes while transition temperature depends
composition. SMAs could be an ideal solution for origami 
actuation, since they can be easily embedded in a complex 
structure providing high forces and wide deformations ranges 
in a very small volume.  
The effective combination of tool dexterity, adequate 
workspace, distal actuation, safe operation and 
miniaturization is the main challenge in designing robots for 
MIS. For this reason, the integration of actuators should 
proceed in parallel with the identification of the most 
effective transmission mechanisms and kinematics. 
Conversely, only a few microfabrication te
adequate for developing small size mechanisms with safe 
operation in the human body. 
In this paper, the proof of concept of a SMA actuated, 
miniaturized, origami-enabled, parallel structure is presented.
The proposed structure presented as a 
novel robotic tool in MIS, has been integrated with a twisting 
module and a gripper obtaining a 4 DOFs miniaturized end
effector with on board actuators as illustrated in Fig. 1.
d adapt their shape to 
the environment in order to safely interact with human 
anatomy during both deployment and operation tasks [11]; 
like actuators such as shape 
memory alloys (SMA) or flexible fluidic actuation can 
preserve platform inherent compliance as demonstrated in the 
design of robots mimicking biological soft structures [12]. 
In recent years, emerging fabrication techniques have 
demonstrated their efficiency in the development of 
miniaturized soft robotic systems preserving flexibility when 
These techniques carry 
many advantages in terms of reduced wirings (i.e. electrical 
connections, sensors and actuators can be embedded in the 
structure as part of the fabrication process), fabrication 
[13]. In particular, Smart 
Composite Microstructure (SCM) fabrication method takes 
advantage of the high accuracy obtainable by 2D laser cut to 
e that can be folded for generating 3D 
. Based on this consideration, origami 
represents a source of inspiration in miniaturized system 
design due to their capability to replicate complex joints 
. Origami structures are quite cost effective 
when fabricated with SCM technique and they are ideal for 
small scale (<cm) applications where surface effects 
dominate: multi components joints are inefficient and too 
rangements of rigid planes 
and flexible hinges can provide equivalent constraints [14], 
From the actuation point of view, SMA represents one of the 
most widely employed technologies in medical instruments 
their unique pseudoelastic features and shape 
in addition to piezomotors and 
pneumatic or hydraulic actuation systems that are more 
common due to their high speed and frequency actuation 
SMA actuators are one of the preferred 
technologies in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
 
compact and compliant 
weight ratio; actuators 
performances can be tuned by annealing the alloy in different 
shapes while transition temperature depends on alloy 
SMAs could be an ideal solution for origami 
tuation, since they can be easily embedded in a complex 
structure providing high forces and wide deformations ranges 
The effective combination of tool dexterity, adequate 
workspace, distal actuation, safe operation and 
ion is the main challenge in designing robots for 
MIS. For this reason, the integration of actuators should 
proceed in parallel with the identification of the most 
effective transmission mechanisms and kinematics. 
Conversely, only a few microfabrication technologies are 
adequate for developing small size mechanisms with safe 
, the proof of concept of a SMA actuated, 
enabled, parallel structure is presented. 
 versatile module for 
, has been integrated with a twisting 
ining a 4 DOFs miniaturized end-
with on board actuators as illustrated in Fig. 1. 
The features of the parallel structure, and the 
system design have been reported in section II,
and performance evaluation are addressed in section III. 
Finally, conclusions and future work are reported in section 
IV. 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Parallel foldable structure
One of the most attractive 
the possibility to design the kinematics and stiffness of the 
mechanism to maintain specific directions in which the whole 
structure can be completely folded
compliance to the system. 
Origami qualities match very well with surgical robotics 
requirements, but one of the most important advantages is the 
possibility to shrink the structure 
designs limiting the need of a 
complexity and platform miniaturization
in systems design with much less limitations for robots 
dexterity. 
The employed foldable parallel stru
in [18], is composed of three 
chains by connecting a triangular shaped 
as shown in Fig. 2a. 
 
Figure 2.  3 DOFs origami enabled parallel platfrom. Linkage and 1
rotational hinges platform assembly (left). Equivalent platform obtained 
folding a 2D rigid planes and flexible hinges (rigth).
The described arrangement of 1 DOF rotational joints and 
system symmetry, generate a 3 DOFs parallel platform whose 
kinematics is based on the virtual symmetric plane
defined by the centers of the three spherical chains.
By actuating the angles ?
1
, ?
2
and the links of the kinematic chain connected to th
described in Fig. 2b, rotations and translations can be applied 
to the platform; available DOFs and 
to a platform composed by a 20 mm side triangular base) 
reported in Fig. 3.  
Origami technique makes it possible 
three-dimensional structure by erecting and folding a 2D 
arrangement of rotational joints (origami creases) and planar 
links. The compact design of the platform allows very small 
size changes during motion du
that accommodates the different configurations of the links. 
Further, the hollow space can be exploited to embed a 
channel for an interchangeable endoscopic tool.
other literature solutions, the proposed module h
advantage of providing rotations up to 45 degrees
10 degrees of the module reported in 
whole continuum robot reported by 
squeezing degree of freedom that can be 
 
of the parallel structure, and the actuation 
system design have been reported in section II, while testing 
and performance evaluation are addressed in section III. 
Finally, conclusions and future work are reported in section 
ATERIALS AND METHODS 
Parallel foldable structure 
attractive features of origami structure is 
the possibility to design the kinematics and stiffness of the 
specific directions in which the whole 
structure can be completely folded, thus providing inherent 
very well with surgical robotics 
, but one of the most important advantages is the 
the structure to very small size complex 
limiting the need of a tradeoff between mechanism 
complexity and platform miniaturization and leaving freedom 
in systems design with much less limitations for robots 
The employed foldable parallel structure, presented by Zhang 
three spherical six-bar kinematic 
triangular shaped base and a platform 
 
 
enabled parallel platfrom. Linkage and 1 DOF 
rotational hinges platform assembly (left). Equivalent platform obtained 
folding a 2D rigid planes and flexible hinges (rigth). 
The described arrangement of 1 DOF rotational joints and 
a 3 DOFs parallel platform whose 
is based on the virtual symmetric plane (π) 
defined by the centers of the three spherical chains. 
2
 and ?
3
 between the base plane 
and the links of the kinematic chain connected to the base, as 
, rotations and translations can be applied 
available DOFs and the workspace (relative 
to a platform composed by a 20 mm side triangular base) are 
makes it possible to obtain the described 
dimensional structure by erecting and folding a 2D 
arrangement of rotational joints (origami creases) and planar 
The compact design of the platform allows very small 
size changes during motion due to the hollow internal volume 
that accommodates the different configurations of the links. 
Further, the hollow space can be exploited to embed a 
interchangeable endoscopic tool. Respect to 
the proposed module has the 
advantage of providing rotations up to 45 degrees, wider than 
10 degrees of the module reported in [4] or 90 degrees of the 
whole continuum robot reported by [19] and provides a 
ezing degree of freedom that can be exploited as 
2845
 
translational DOF or converted to a rotational DOF of a 
gripper by integrating a passive twisting module
this paper. 
 
Figure 3.  Parallel foldable structure workspace (left) and degrees of 
freedom (rigth): two rotational (top and central) and one translational 
(bottom). 
B. Gripper design 
The gripper has been placed in the top of the 
illustrated in Fig. 1. Its design consists of 
structure to be coupled to a linear actuator
gripper is connected to a SMA actuator with a cable 
designed to exert a normal force to the flexible beam
elements analyses and experimental tests 
conducted in order to define and verify its range of motion 
and the force required for its actuation. Gripper design and 
force/deflection curve are reported in Fig. 4
 
Figure 4.  Gripper design with highligthteed the dimension of the flexible 
hinge in mm (left), force deflection curve characteristic of the 
gripper. 
In order to provide a rotational DOF to the gripper, the 
translational motion of the parallel structure 
been converted by exploiting the novel 
parallel mechanism (twisting module) with a virtual central 
shaft illustrated in Fig. 5.  
The proposed twisting module employs only rotational joints 
and the three legs are symmetrically distributed. 
According to the geometry of the joints axes in the chain 
legs, the platform of the parallel mechanism is constrained by 
three constraint forces exerted by the three legs; the three 
constraint forces are lying on a hyperboloids of revolution 
about the axis OO’ joining the base and platform
converted to a rotational DOF of a 
twisting module proposed in 
 
 
 
workspace (left) and degrees of 
: two rotational (top and central) and one translational 
gripper has been placed in the top of the system as 
of a simple compliant 
to a linear actuator. The compliant 
gripper is connected to a SMA actuator with a cable 
designed to exert a normal force to the flexible beam. Finite 
experimental tests have been 
in order to define and verify its range of motion 
Gripper design and it 
reported in Fig. 4. 
 
Gripper design with highligthteed the dimension of the flexible 
(left), force deflection curve characteristic of the compliant 
provide a rotational DOF to the gripper, the 
structure in Fig. 3 has 
 1 DOF three-legged 
with a virtual central 
employs only rotational joints 
and the three legs are symmetrically distributed.  
According to the geometry of the joints axes in the chain 
legs, the platform of the parallel mechanism is constrained by 
three constraint forces exerted by the three legs; the three 
hyperboloids of revolution 
joining the base and platform centers. 
Figure 5.  1 DOFs origami enabled twisting module. Linkage and 1DOF 
rotational hinges platform assembly (left). Equivalent platform obtained 
folding a 2D rigid planes and flexible hinges (rigth).
Due to the additional constraint provided by the
passing through O and O’ and connecting the gripper 
parallel module, the motion of the 
is restricted to 1 DOF screw motion 
Hence, the twisting module
converting the translational squeezing 
structure into a rotational motion of the gripper.
According to the structure of the passive 
the screw motion, the twisting angle of the 
respect to the base of the mechanism can be derived as
where ? is the twisting angle of the platform, 
the chain leg and h is the vertical distance bet
platform and the base. 
Since the gripper rotation angle is dependent 
module squeezing translational movement
Fig. 5 and 6), Eq. (1) becomes
Figure 6.  The proposed twisting module, enables the conversion of 
parallel module translational degree of freedom into a rotational DOF of the 
gripper, the width of the rotation ? is 
C. Actuation system design 
For their unique features SMAs 
miniaturized compliant robotic systems, but unfortunately 
they have many drawbacks: since
by a temperature transition (usually obtained by joule effect
and since it highly depends by the
the environment, their control is challenging and their 
actuation speed and frequency is quite limited. The alloy 
presents hysteresis during activation/deactivation phases and 
overheating compromises actuators functionalities.
However, recent works incremented the knowledge and 
usability of these actuators, defining more efficient and 
accurate models [20] and design methods. Literature works 
 
 
 
1 DOFs origami enabled twisting module. Linkage and 1DOF 
rotational hinges platform assembly (left). Equivalent platform obtained 
folding a 2D rigid planes and flexible hinges (rigth). 
additional constraint provided by the hollow shaft 
’ and connecting the gripper to the 
, the motion of the proposed twisting module 
DOF screw motion with axis OO’. 
module acts as a passive structure 
squeezing motion of the parallel 
tational motion of the gripper.  
of the passive twisting module and 
the screw motion, the twisting angle of the platform with 
respect to the base of the mechanism can be derived as 
 
(1) 
is the twisting angle of the platform, l is the length of 
is the vertical distance between the 
Since the gripper rotation angle is dependent on the  parallel 
translational movement d,  (as described in 
Eq. (1) becomes: 
 
(2) 
 
The proposed twisting module, enables the conversion of 
parallel module translational degree of freedom into a rotational DOF of the 
is dependent by the sqeezing range d. 
tures SMAs are very good candidate for 
miniaturized compliant robotic systems, but unfortunately 
since their activation is initiated 
usually obtained by joule effect) 
and since it highly depends by the thermal exchanges with 
the environment, their control is challenging and their 
actuation speed and frequency is quite limited. The alloy 
presents hysteresis during activation/deactivation phases and 
overheating compromises actuators functionalities. 
er, recent works incremented the knowledge and 
usability of these actuators, defining more efficient and 
and design methods. Literature works 
2846
 
investigated the possibilities to obtain sensorless feedback for 
SMA linear actuators in helical spring shape exploiting the 
measurements of the inductance relative to actuators 
geometry [21], thus minimizing the components to integrate 
in the robot. Small scale robots (< cm) 
applicability since surface phenomena become predominant 
respect to volume ones improving thermal exchanges 
therefore incrementing actuators performance. Moreover, 
specific mechanisms can be designed in order to 
some drawbacks typical of SMA actuator systems
biologically inspired mechanism embedded in the  jumping 
robot proposed by Kim et al [22] provides high speed 
actuation exploiting SMA actuators used
an elastic element. 
In this work, SMA actuators have been embedd
previously described parallel structure in order to 
demonstrate the feasibility of a 4 DOFs origami 
effector. 
In order to simplify the system design, the actuators able to 
maximize the squeezing DOF with a synchronous actuation 
have been identified, while the maximum obtainable angular 
motion has been verified experimentally (see Section III).
Since the parallel module has been obtained by folding a 0.3 
mm thick paper sheet, a steel helical 
(wire diameter 0.58 mm, external diameter 9.
height 15 mm and 3 active coils for a resulting spring 
constant of 0.59 N/mm) connecting the base 
has been employed to provide elasticity to the structure.
The elasticity of the system during axial compression motion
has been then characterized by experimental tests in order to 
evaluate the influence of the parallel structure 
spring behavior (Fig. 7). 
For both structure elasticity and SMA actuators 
characterization, a strain stress setup composed by a linear 
stage interfaced to a brushless motor and a ATI nano17 force 
torque sensor has been exploited.  
The strain stress curve resulting by 10 cyclic 
different prototypes has been reported in F
static two-state model, proposed by An et al 
describe nonlinearities induced by martensite detwinning 
phase and the by helical spring large de
implemented and experimental tests on SMA helical springs 
have been conducted in order to retrieve the 
parameters. 
 
Figure 7.  Steel helical compression spring connecting the top an
base of the parallel module (left). Force deflection curves of the parallel 
module during compression tests (rigth). 
The SMA actuators have been manufactured constraining 
SMA wires (Flexinol by Dynalloy, CA, 
rod and annealing the alloy at a temperature of 500 °C for 15 
minutes; the geometric parameters of the 
spring, are reported in Table I.  
investigated the possibilities to obtain sensorless feedback for 
SMA linear actuators in helical spring shape exploiting the 
e relative to actuators 
, thus minimizing the components to integrate 
cm) are ideal for SMA 
e surface phenomena become predominant 
respect to volume ones improving thermal exchanges 
therefore incrementing actuators performance. Moreover, 
be designed in order to overcome 
drawbacks typical of SMA actuator systems i.e. the 
biologically inspired mechanism embedded in the  jumping 
provides high speed 
actuation exploiting SMA actuators used to release suddenly 
In this work, SMA actuators have been embedded in the 
parallel structure in order to 
origami enabled end-
In order to simplify the system design, the actuators able to 
maximize the squeezing DOF with a synchronous actuation 
maximum obtainable angular 
motion has been verified experimentally (see Section III). 
the parallel module has been obtained by folding a 0.3 
steel helical compression spring 
mm, external diameter 9.2 mm, spring 
active coils for a resulting spring 
connecting the base and the platform 
to provide elasticity to the structure. 
system during axial compression motion 
racterized by experimental tests in order to 
structure on the steel 
For both structure elasticity and SMA actuators 
characterization, a strain stress setup composed by a linear 
and a ATI nano17 force 
The strain stress curve resulting by 10 cyclic solicitations of 2 
has been reported in Fig. 7 (right). The 
state model, proposed by An et al [20] able to 
describe nonlinearities induced by martensite detwinning 
phase and the by helical spring large deformations, has been 
implemented and experimental tests on SMA helical springs 
have been conducted in order to retrieve the characteristics 
 
on spring connecting the top and the 
Force deflection curves of the parallel 
The SMA actuators have been manufactured constraining 
CA, USA) around a steel 
annealing the alloy at a temperature of 500 °C for 15 
he geometric parameters of the tested SMA helical 
The SMA strain stress curves in austenite and martensite 
phases superimposed with mod
while in Table II have been summarized the SMA retrieved 
parameters: 
· G
A
 and G
M
, the shear modulus in aust
martensite conditions 
· ?
A
Cr
 the maximum shear stress in 
· ?
s
Cr
 the shear stress corresponding to the beginning of 
stress induced detwinning process
· ?
f
Cr
 the shear stress corresponding to the end of stress 
induced detwinning process
· ?
L
 the maximum residual strain
TABLE I.  PARAMETERS OF SMA
OBTAINING ACTUATOR PROPERTIES
Spring 
index
 a
 
Wire diameter 
[µm] 
7 200 
a. The spring index is defined as the spring diameter
Figure 8.  Force/deflection and stress strain curves of the SMA tested coil 
experimental and model comparison. 
TABLE II.  PROPERTIES OF THE 
In A
100%
 state 
G
A
 
[GPa] ?
A
22 
 In M
100%
 state 
G
M 
[GPa] ?
s
8.15 
Once obtained the model parameters, the dimensional 
constraints for the actuators, (maximum 
and maximum length of the spring)  have been identified.
The possibility of placing a single actuator 
actuators in parallel configurat
platform, as shown in Fig. 9, has been considered.
 
Figure 9.  Possible SMA helical spring arrangement in the parallel module. 
Single actuator solution consisting in three
solution consisting in six actuators (rigth).
In order to identify the most appropriate design
the platform elastic characteristic
analytical model of the SMA 
parameters  (i.e. wire diameter, spring 
active coils). 
 
he SMA strain stress curves in austenite and martensite 
phases superimposed with model results are reported in Fig. 8 
while in Table II have been summarized the SMA retrieved 
shear modulus in austenite and 
the maximum shear stress in austenite phase 
the shear stress corresponding to the beginning of 
stress induced detwinning process 
the shear stress corresponding to the end of stress 
induced detwinning process 
the maximum residual strain ? 
SMA HELICAL SPRING SPECIMEN FOR 
CTUATOR PROPERTIES 
Wire diameter Spring 
diameter[mm] 
N° of turns 
1.4 17 
a. The spring index is defined as the spring diameter-to-wire diameter ratio 
 
Force/deflection and stress strain curves of the SMA tested coil 
 
ROPERTIES OF THE SMA COIL SPRING ACTUATOR 
A
Cr
 
[MPa] 
 
260 
s
Cr
 
[MPa] ?
f
Cr
 [MPa] ?
L
 
10 140 0.04 
Once obtained the model parameters, the dimensional 
constraints for the actuators, (maximum external diameter 
and maximum length of the spring)  have been identified. 
The possibility of placing a single actuator (SA) or two 
actuators in parallel configuration (PA) in each corner of the 
, has been considered. 
 
Possible SMA helical spring arrangement in the parallel module. 
Single actuator solution consisting in three actuators (left). Parallel actuator 
solution consisting in six actuators (rigth). 
In order to identify the most appropriate design parameters, 
characteristic has been compared with an 
 actuator [20] varying its design 
parameters  (i.e. wire diameter, spring diameter, number of 
2847
 
The most performing solution for single actuator and for the 
actuators in parallel configuration have been identified,
graph describing the coupling of the actuators with the bias 
element is reported in Fig. 10 while the actuators features are 
and reported in Table III.  
In order to simplify the system design, the hysteresis induced 
by the structure material has not been considered 
a mean curve in between loading and unloading. The 
simulations were implemented exploiting a
(MathWorks, USA) routine and the resulting design 
possibilities have been sorted in order to maximize actuation 
range. 
 
Figure 10.  SMA actuators /bias 
element coupling referred to the steel 
spring reference system.SA 
configuration shows lower actuation 
range respect to PA configuration. 
Figure 11. 
element coupling 
steel spring reference system.SA 
configuration shows lower 
actuation range respect to PA 
configuration.
The method described for the parallel module actuation 
design, has been employed for the gripper actuators design.
The SMA spring, used to actuate the gripper, has been placed 
inside a flexible PTFE tube (inner diameter of 2.5 mm, 
external diameter of 4 mm and length of 22 mm) playing the 
role of shaft connecting the gripper to the base of the parallel 
module and passing through the twisting module. 
obtain 15deg of gripper open/close range, the
system has to be actuated according to the 
curves reported in Fig. 4. However, the employed material 
viscoelasticity produced an important hy
metal material for the gripper, such as titanium or beryllium
copper (MR compatibles) should drastically improve the 
gripper behavior thanks to more predictable properties of the 
material. 
The parameters of the actuator satisfying th
constraints and providing the wider actuation range for the 
gripper actuation (GA), are reported in Table III.  
TABLE III.  SMA HELICAL SPRING ACTUATION
 
Spring 
index
 a
 
Wire diameter
[µm] 
Spring 
 diameter[mm]
PA 8 250 2 
SA 8.7 375 3.25 
GA 5 300 2.1 
a. The spring index is defined as the spring diameter
D. System integration and performance evaluation
The various components composing the 4
effector, have been initially tested separately in order to 
distinguish the performance of each component. 
Successively, the proposed device has been 
the components jointed performances have been obtained.
The most performing solution for single actuator and for the 
ation have been identified, the 
graph describing the coupling of the actuators with the bias 
while the actuators features are 
design, the hysteresis induced 
by the structure material has not been considered employing 
a mean curve in between loading and unloading. The 
exploiting a MATLAB 
and the resulting design 
have been sorted in order to maximize actuation 
 
Figure 11.  SMA actuators /bias 
element coupling referred to the 
steel spring reference system.SA 
configuration shows lower 
actuation range respect to PA 
configuration. 
described for the parallel module actuation 
design, has been employed for the gripper actuators design. 
The SMA spring, used to actuate the gripper, has been placed 
inside a flexible PTFE tube (inner diameter of 2.5 mm, 
external diameter of 4 mm and length of 22 mm) playing the 
role of shaft connecting the gripper to the base of the parallel 
ng through the twisting module. In order to 
obtain 15deg of gripper open/close range, the compliant 
system has to be actuated according to the average of the 
the employed material 
hysteresis; the use of a 
such as titanium or beryllium-
should drastically improve the 
more predictable properties of the 
The parameters of the actuator satisfying the design 
constraints and providing the wider actuation range for the 
gripper actuation (GA), are reported in Table III.   
ACTUATION FEATURES 
diameter[mm] 
N° of 
turns 
Actuation 
range [mm] 
7 6.2 
5 5.9 
11 1.1 
the spring diameter-to-wire diameter ratio 
System integration and performance evaluation 
The various components composing the 4-DOFs end-
effector, have been initially tested separately in order to 
distinguish the performance of each component. 
ely, the proposed device has been assembled and 
have been obtained. 
The parallel structure has been assembled (see the companion 
video for details) embedding the actuators 
has been connected to three independent PWM driven current 
generator circuits. The PWM signal has been generated by an 
ARDUINO UNO board (Arduino
command has been acquired by a joystick, elaborated and 
sent to the board via serial co
of 100 Hz. The command acquired by the joystick has been 
elaborated in order to convert a desired bending direction into 
PWM values applied to the actuators
0.6 A have been employed. 
with an room temperature of 22° C , actuation time have been 
evaluated around 1 second. Forced ventilation has been 
employed to speed-up the cooling process.
Obtaining a feedback on platform pose and employing the 
inverse kinematics, to perform position closed loop control 
will be part of future works and 
this paper. 
Elaborating camera recordings (5Mpxl digital camera, 
SONY, Japan) with a simple segmentation algorithm, 
actuation range of SA and PA configurations 
obtained for both bending and squeezing DOF
The gripper has been assembled placing the compliant
component at the top of the PTFE tube
inside the tube has been constrained at the bottom component 
of the parallel module (Fig 1
range has been verified. 
Finally, the whole device has been assembled 
and the conversion of the parallel module squeezing motion 
to a gripper roll motion thanks to the twisting module has 
been evaluated. 
Figure 12.  Prototypes produced for components and system performace 
evaluation. Parallel module SA (left top) and 
gripper (center). 4 DOFs wrist integrating all the sy
including the twisting module. 
III. RESULTS AND 
Actuation range of the squeezing DOF for the parallel 
module in SA and PA configuration has been evaluat
5.2 mm and 6.1mm respectively, 
Figure 13.  Actuation range of the squeezing DOF for the parallel module in 
SA (left) and PA (right) configurations 
While angular range in platform bending resulted
for SA and +27/-20 degrees for PA.
 
has been assembled (see the companion 
video for details) embedding the actuators (Fig. 12 left) and it 
has been connected to three independent PWM driven current 
generator circuits. The PWM signal has been generated by an 
oard (Arduino, Italy) the actuation 
command has been acquired by a joystick, elaborated and 
sent to the board via serial communication with a frequency 
The command acquired by the joystick has been 
elaborated in order to convert a desired bending direction into 
values applied to the actuators, maximum currents of 
. The tests have been conducted 
with an room temperature of 22° C , actuation time have been 
evaluated around 1 second. Forced ventilation has been 
up the cooling process. 
Obtaining a feedback on platform pose and employing the 
to perform position closed loop control 
will be part of future works and it is not within the aims of 
Elaborating camera recordings (5Mpxl digital camera, 
with a simple segmentation algorithm, 
SA and PA configurations has been 
obtained for both bending and squeezing DOFs. 
The gripper has been assembled placing the compliant 
component at the top of the PTFE tube, the actuator running 
inside the tube has been constrained at the bottom component 
(Fig 12 center). Gripper actuation 
Finally, the whole device has been assembled (Fig.12 right) 
and the conversion of the parallel module squeezing motion 
to a gripper roll motion thanks to the twisting module has 
 
produced for components and system performace 
evaluation. Parallel module SA (left top) and PA (left bottom). Compliant 
OFs wrist integrating all the system components 
ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Actuation range of the squeezing DOF for the parallel 
module in SA and PA configuration has been evaluated as 
5.2 mm and 6.1mm respectively,  
 
Actuation range of the squeezing DOF for the parallel module in 
SA (left) and PA (right) configurations . 
hile angular range in platform bending resulted +27/-15 
20 degrees for PA. 
2848
 
 
Figure 14.  Actuation range of the angle DOF for the parallel module in SA 
(topline ) and PA (bottom line) configurations. 
The compliant gripper has been actuated successfully
due to the low elasticity of the rapid prototyping employed 
material, the actuation range resulted quite small
furthermore the employed PTFE tube decreases thermal 
exchanges increasing the cooling time of the alloy
Finally, the complete prototype has been assembled and the 
gripper roll angular range has been evaluated.
configuration of the parallel module has been employed 
since provides wider actuation range; for a squeezing motion 
of 6 mm the corresponding roll motion has been around 70 
degrees. 
In the final prototype, a reduction of the parallel module 
actuation range has been noticed due to the quite 
stiffness of the PTFE tube. 
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper a SMA actuated, miniaturized, origami
parallel structure is presented as a versatile module for novel 
robotic tool in MIS; moreover, the parallel module has been 
coupled with a novel twisting module and a compliant 
gripper obtaining a 4-DOFs miniaturized 
The proposed design approach has the advantage to generate 
scalable devices avoiding the need of simplifying 
mechanisms or scarifying robot dexterity. Inherent 
compliance is one of the most important characteristics of the 
proposed system both in the structure itself and on the 
actuation system. 
The proof of concept of the proposed system shows 
promising results, although actuation system has not been 
optimized and more effective actuation configurations can be 
designed. 
Inverse kinematics considering degrees of freedom couplings 
i.e. contemporary twisting and bending motion, jointly with 
optimized design and scalability of the technology will be the 
focus of future works, SCM fabrication technique will be 
considered a reference point. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Champagne B, Stulberg JJ, Fan Z, Delaney CP. The feasibility of 
laparoscopic colectomy in urgent and emergent settings. Surg Endosc 
2008; 23(8): 1791 – 1796 
[2] Asakuma M, Perretta S, Allemann P, et al. 
lessons learned from NOTES cholecystectomy initial experience: 
stepwise approach from the laboratory to clinical 
of Hepatobiliary Surgery 16: 249–254. 
 
 
range of the angle DOF for the parallel module in SA 
The compliant gripper has been actuated successfully, but 
due to the low elasticity of the rapid prototyping employed 
ctuation range resulted quite small; 
furthermore the employed PTFE tube decreases thermal 
exchanges increasing the cooling time of the alloy. 
Finally, the complete prototype has been assembled and the 
gripper roll angular range has been evaluated. The PA 
configuration of the parallel module has been employed 
actuation range; for a squeezing motion 
of 6 mm the corresponding roll motion has been around 70 
In the final prototype, a reduction of the parallel module 
actuation range has been noticed due to the quite high 
ON AND FUTURE WORKS 
In this paper a SMA actuated, miniaturized, origami-enabled, 
parallel structure is presented as a versatile module for novel 
robotic tool in MIS; moreover, the parallel module has been 
twisting module and a compliant 
DOFs miniaturized end-effector. 
The proposed design approach has the advantage to generate 
scalable devices avoiding the need of simplifying 
mechanisms or scarifying robot dexterity. Inherent 
compliance is one of the most important characteristics of the 
proposed system both in the structure itself and on the 
The proof of concept of the proposed system shows 
promising results, although actuation system has not been 
nd more effective actuation configurations can be 
Inverse kinematics considering degrees of freedom couplings 
i.e. contemporary twisting and bending motion, jointly with 
ptimized design and scalability of the technology will be the 
SCM fabrication technique will be 
Champagne B, Stulberg JJ, Fan Z, Delaney CP. The feasibility of 
t and emergent settings. Surg Endosc 
Asakuma M, Perretta S, Allemann P, et al. (2009) Challenges and 
ecystectomy initial experience: a 
from the laboratory to clinical application. Journal 
[3] A. Lehman, N. Wood, S. Farritor, M. Goede, and D. Oleynik
Dexterous miniature robot for advan
Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 25, pp. 119
[4] Tognarelli, S., Salerno, M., Tortora, G., Quaglia, C., Dario, P., & 
Menciassi, A. (2012, June). 
Minimally Invasive Surger
Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS & EMB
International Conference on (pp. 7
[5] Dupont, P. E., Lock, J., Itkowitz, B., & Butler, E. (2010). Design and 
control of concentric-tube robots. Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, 
26(2), 209-225. 
[6] J. Shang, C. J. Payne, J. Clark, D. P. Noonan, K.
and G.-Z. Yang, “Design of a multitasking robotic platform with
ﬂexible arms and articulated head for minimally invasive surgery,” in
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012, pp.
1988–1993. 
[7] Bajo, A., Dharamsi, L., Netterville, J. L., Garrett, G. C. & Simaan, N 
(2013). Robotic-Assisted Micro
Approach. In Appected for publication in IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA'2013).
[8] LM Dharamsi, A Bajo, JL Netterville, CG Garrett, N Simaan A 
Telerobotic System for Transnasal Surgery of the Larynx and Upper 
Airways Otolaryngology--Head and Neck Surgery 149 (2 suppl), P89
P90 
[9] Vitiello, V.; Su-Lin Lee; Cundy, T.P.; Guang
Robotic Platforms for Minimally Invasive Surgery," Biomedical 
Engineering, IEEE Reviews in , vol.6, no., pp.111,126, 2013 
[10] Shang, J., Noonan, D. P., Payne, C., Clark, J., Sodergren, M. H., 
Darzi, A., & Yang, G. Z. (2011, May). An articulated universal joint 
based flexible access robot for minimally invasive surgery. In 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International 
Conference on (pp. 1147-1152). IEEE.
[11] Salerno, M., Tognarelli, S., Quaglia, C., Dario, P., & Menciassi, A. 
(2013). Anchoring frame for intra
International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(3), 360
[12] Follador, M., M. Cianchetti, and C. Laschi. "Development of the 
functional unit of a completely soft octopus
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE 
RAS & EMBS International Conference on. IEEE, 2012.
[13] Cho, K. J., Koh, J. S., Kim, S., Chu, W. S., Hong, Y., & Ahn, S. H. 
(2009). Review of manufacturing processes for soft biomimetic 
robots. International Journal of Precision Engineering and 
Manufacturing, 10(3), 171-181.
[14] Wood, R. J., Avadhanula, S., Sahai, R., Steltz, E., & Fearing, R.
(2008). Microrobot design using fiber reinforced composites. Journal 
of Mechanical Design, 130, 052304.
[15] K. Zhang and J. S. Dai, (2013
Foldable Linkages and Emerging Applications, ASME 2013 
International Design Engine
Computers and Information in Enginee
USA. 
[16] Fischer, H., Vogel, B., & Welle, A. (2004). Applications of shape 
memory alloys in medical instruments. Minimally Invasive Therapy & 
Allied Technologies, 13(4), 248
[17] Ho, M., McMillan, A. B., Simard, J. M., Gullapalli, R., & Desai, J. P. 
(2012). Toward a meso-scale 
neurosurgical robot. Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, 28(1), 213
[18] K. Zhang, Y. Fang, J. S. Dai and H. Fang, 
Constraint Analysis of the 3
Parallel Mechanism, ASME Transactions, Journal of Mechanism and 
Robotics, 2(3). 
[19] Simaan, N., Taylor, R., & Flint, P. (2004, April). 
for laryngeal surgery. In Robotics and Automation, 2004. 
Proceedings. ICRA'04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on (Vol. 
1, pp. 351-357). IEEE. 
[20] An, S. M., Ryu, J., Cho, M., & Cho, K. J. (2012). Engineering design 
framework for a shape memory alloy coil spring actuator using a stati
two-state model. Smart Materials and Structures, 21(5), 055009.
[21] Kim, H., Han, Y., Lee, D. Y., Ha, J. I., & Cho, K. J. (2013). 
Sensorless displacement estimation of a shape memory alloy coil 
spring actuator using inductance. Smart Materials and Structures
22(2), 025001. 
[22] Noh, M., Kim, S. W., An, S., Koh, J. S., & Cho, K. J. (2012). Flea
inspired catapult mechanism for miniature jumping robots.
Int. Workshop on Bio-Inspired Robots.
 
A. Lehman, N. Wood, S. Farritor, M. Goede, and D. Oleynikov, 
Dexterous miniature robot for advanced minimally invasive surgery, 
Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 25, pp. 119–123, Jan. 2011.  
Tognarelli, S., Salerno, M., Tortora, G., Quaglia, C., Dario, P., & 
Menciassi, A. (2012, June). An endoluminal robotic platform for 
Minimally Invasive Surgery. In Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS & EMBS 
International Conference on (pp. 7-12). IEEE. 
Dupont, P. E., Lock, J., Itkowitz, B., & Butler, E. (2010). Design and 
tube robots. Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, 
J. Shang, C. J. Payne, J. Clark, D. P. Noonan, K.-W. Kwok, A. Darzi, 
Z. Yang, “Design of a multitasking robotic platform with 
articulated head for minimally invasive surgery,” in 
Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012, pp. 
Bajo, A., Dharamsi, L., Netterville, J. L., Garrett, G. C. & Simaan, N 
Assisted Micro-Surgery of Throat: the Trans-Nasal 
Approach. In Appected for publication in IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA'2013). 
LM Dharamsi, A Bajo, JL Netterville, CG Garrett, N Simaan A 
Transnasal Surgery of the Larynx and Upper 
Head and Neck Surgery 149 (2 suppl), P89-
Lin Lee; Cundy, T.P.; Guang-Zhong Yang, "Emerging 
Robotic Platforms for Minimally Invasive Surgery," Biomedical 
Engineering, IEEE Reviews in , vol.6, no., pp.111,126, 2013  
onan, D. P., Payne, C., Clark, J., Sodergren, M. H., 
Darzi, A., & Yang, G. Z. (2011, May). An articulated universal joint 
based flexible access robot for minimally invasive surgery. In 
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International 
1152). IEEE. 
Salerno, M., Tognarelli, S., Quaglia, C., Dario, P., & Menciassi, A. 
Anchoring frame for intra-abdominal surgery. The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, 32(3), 360-370. 
Cianchetti, and C. Laschi. "Development of the 
functional unit of a completely soft octopus-like robotic arm." 
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE 
RAS & EMBS International Conference on. IEEE, 2012. 
S., Chu, W. S., Hong, Y., & Ahn, S. H. 
(2009). Review of manufacturing processes for soft biomimetic 
robots. International Journal of Precision Engineering and 
181. 
Wood, R. J., Avadhanula, S., Sahai, R., Steltz, E., & Fearing, R. S. 
(2008). Microrobot design using fiber reinforced composites. Journal 
of Mechanical Design, 130, 052304. 
2013). Classification of Origami Evolved 
Foldable Linkages and Emerging Applications, ASME 2013 
International Design Engineering Technical Conferences & 
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference, Portland, 
& Welle, A. (2004). Applications of shape 
memory alloys in medical instruments. Minimally Invasive Therapy & 
Allied Technologies, 13(4), 248-253. 
Ho, M., McMillan, A. B., Simard, J. M., Gullapalli, R., & Desai, J. P. 
scale SMA-actuated MRI-compatible 
neurosurgical robot. Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, 28(1), 213-222. 
Zhang, Y. Fang, J. S. Dai and H. Fang, (2010). Geometry and 
Constraint Analysis of the 3-Spherical Kinematic Chain Based 
Parallel Mechanism, ASME Transactions, Journal of Mechanism and 
Simaan, N., Taylor, R., & Flint, P. (2004, April). A dexterous system 
for laryngeal surgery. In Robotics and Automation, 2004. 
Proceedings. ICRA'04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on (Vol. 
An, S. M., Ryu, J., Cho, M., & Cho, K. J. (2012). Engineering design 
framework for a shape memory alloy coil spring actuator using a static 
state model. Smart Materials and Structures, 21(5), 055009. 
Kim, H., Han, Y., Lee, D. Y., Ha, J. I., & Cho, K. J. (2013). 
Sensorless displacement estimation of a shape memory alloy coil 
spring actuator using inductance. Smart Materials and Structures, 
Noh, M., Kim, S. W., An, S., Koh, J. S., & Cho, K. J. (2012). Flea-
inspired catapult mechanism for miniature jumping robots. In Proc. 
Inspired Robots. 
2849
