Automated Robotic Assembly for a Micro-Cartridge System inside the
Scanning Electron Microscope
Malte Bartenwerfer
1
, Claas Diederichs
1,2
, and Sergej Fatikow
1,2
Abstract—The AFM is a common tool for ultra-precise
surface characterization and a standard instrument a vari-
ety of research and development disciplines. However, the
characterization of three dimensional high-aspect ratio and
sidewall structures remains a hardly accomplishable task.
Novel exchangeable and customizable scanning probe tips -
NanoBits- can be attached to standard AFM cantilevers offering
unprecedented freedom in adapting the shape and size of the
tips. These NanoBits of few ?m size have to be assembled into
micro-cartridges. This challenging assembly task is performed
inside the SEM by a micro-gripper. A powerful automation
framework has been developed facilitating image based au-
tomation and visual servoing for this task. Template matching,
BLOB-detection, and special SEM-based detection approaches
are used to achieve the automated assembly.
I. INTRODUCTION
Today’s industry for micro- and nanotechnology produces
devices which are expected to offer a particular performance.
Hence, they are required to have well-deﬁned, reproducible
and traceable properties. This can be guaranteed only by
precise controlling, metrology steps and especially measure-
ments at the critical dimension - the threshold is where the
measurement system reaches its resolution limit - and the
systems are already pushed to that limit.
Atomic force microscope (AFM) has become a precious
and widespread tool for surface characterization; it is the
primary metrology instruments in the micro- and nanoscale
and can be found in all kinds of research and development
disciplines. Nevertheless, the capabilities of the AFM are
still limited by the geometry of the AFM-tips. The standard
task is the analysis of horizontal surfaces with low aspect-
ratios. Many research projects tackle this issue: some works
have shown that reﬁnement or decoration of AFM-tips can
improve the imaging quality especially of the aspect-ratio
by orders of magnitudes. In addition to the problem of
the tip geometry, many researchers already have developed
approaches to control AFM scans with different scanning
orientations than just a ﬂat surface [1], [2], [3], [4], [5].
This contribution is about the realization of novel, ex-
changeable, and customizable AFM-tips. These tips, so-
called NanoBits, can be mounted at the end of special ﬂat-
tip cantilevers, whose remaining design is equal to standard
cantilevers. Thus, the integration of NanoBits is possible in
*This work was supported by NANOBITS
1
Authors are faculty members of the Division Microrobotics
and Control Engineering, Department of Computing Science,
University of Oldenburg, D-26129 Oldenburg, Germany,
m.bartenwerfer@uni-oldenburg.de
2
Authors are with OFFIS, Institute for Information Technology, Escher-
weg 2, 26121 Oldenburg, Germany
every conventional commercial AFM system. NanoBits are
customizable and provide a more detailed characterization
of complex structures than has been achieved to date [6].
The fundamental idea of the project is an automated in-situ
exchange of NanoBits in the AFM, since this guarantees
seamless integration into conventional AFM systems and
processes. For this reason, NanoBits have to be perpendicular
freestanding and accessible for the AFM cantilever, which is
a remaining challenge for a direct microfabrication process.
Although there are attempts to achieve this [7], the most
suitable approach at the moment is a NanoBits carrying
cartridge system. Such a cartridge, ﬁlled with NanoBits, can
be fed into a standard AFM system, equipped with special
cantilevers, which are capable of picking them up. Previous
papers have presented the idea of the NanoBits project[8],
[9], their fabrication [10], [11] and all components [12], [11]
in detail.
This contribution focuses on the automation challenges,
which arise on the micro- and nanoscale and under scanning
electron microscope (SEM) conditions. A simple pick-and-
place handling is not possible, and also visual servoing (VS)
approaches have to be redeveloped and improved to solve
these problems properly. Few attempts have been made for
robotic automation under SEM conditions, but none for the
automated assembly of building blocks [13], [14], [15].
II. AUTOMATION ENVIRONMENT
The ﬁnal product of the assembly process is a cartridge
ﬁlled with NanoBits. Nevertheless, the assembly process on
its own requires many more components: a mircrogripper
for the actual handling, positioning stages as robotic basis,
as well as control hardware for all these components. Finally,
the entire process is controlled by a software backend using
several control and support strategies.
A. Automation Setup
All handling tasks are performed inside the SEM. The
SEM at hand is the combined SEM and FIB microscope
type ”Lyra” from TESCAN. The electron beam is generated
by a high resolution Schottky-emitter, while the ion beam
origins from a conventional gallium liquid metal ion source.
The vacuum chamber is equipped with a standard motorized
sample stage carrying the actual robotic handling setup as
shown in ﬁgure 1.
1) Robotic System: The robotic handling setup consists
of two major components, a ﬁne positioning for the gripper
and a coarse positioning unit as sample exchanger:
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5197
Fig. 1. Image of the robotic handling setup inside the SEM vacuum cham-
ber. The x,y,z,?-coarse positioning stage carries both samples: NanoBits
fabrication substrate and the cartridge. The x,y,z-ﬁne positioning stage
carries the gripper.
The ﬁne positioning unit is a ”Hera P-620” stage from
Physikinstrumente (PI) with three linear orthogonal axes. The
axes are equipped with internal capacitive sensors enabling
a closed-loop positioning accuracy of about 1.6nm. This
systems allows high precision, smooth and vibration free
movements. The working range is up to 100 by 100 by
50?m
3
. The system is close-loop controlled by an analog
”E-509” controller, which is fed by the automation-PC via
a NationalInstruments AD PCI-card. This system is used to
perform the actual gripping and insertion tasks.
The coarse positioning unit is a SmarAct stage with three
linear orthogonal axes and a 360° rotatory axis, driven by
stick-slip piezo motors. All axes are equipped with optical
encoders enabling a closed-loop positioning accuracy of
several nanometers and microdegree, respectively. The full
traveling range is 21 by 21 by 21mm
3
. The system is con-
nected to an external control-unit, which is directly controlled
by the automation-PC via USB. Due to the comparably large
vibrations of this slip-stick driven systems, this system is
used only to pre-align all components within some tens of
?ms.
By combining these two systems the advantages of both
can be used while avoiding most drawbacks: On the one
hand, fast sample exchange is realized, since stored positions
can be approached automatically. On the other hand, fast,
ultra precise and vibration free closed-loop positioning is
feasible for the actual handling task.
In conclusion, the coarse positioning unit is used to
exchange samples and bring them as close to the gripper
(roughly 20?m distance) as necessary. All these steps are
performed without vision feedback and rely only on the
internal sensor feedback.
2) Microsystem Components: The goal of the auto-
mated handling task is the ﬁlling of a micro-cartridge with
NanoBits. Therefore, three micro-scale components are in-
volved: the NanoBits, a transferring gripper, the receiving
cartridge.
The micro-scale gripper is the crucial tool for the as-
sembly. It is electrothermally actuated and just the two
states (open/closed) are used. Intermediate states are hardly
controllable and hence not used. Fabrication and properties
Fig. 2. Design of the receiving structure of the cartridge. The opening
has a 1? 1.5?m
2
opening, the receiving trench a width of 300nm and the
whole silicon structure has a thickness of 4?m.
are well approved and described in [16].
The NanoBits handled in this work are fabricated by
electron beam lithography and come in batches of about
50 items. The have a size of about 10 by 4?m
2
and a
thickness of about 200-300nm. The full production process
is described in [11]. In the ﬁnal handling setup, gripper and
NanoBits are pre-tilted by 45° in order to determine the in-
gripper rotation properly (cf. [9]).
The cartridge acts as the NanoBits’ carrier storage system
[11]. It has to fulﬁll the following demands: i) During
the insertion, the tip of the NanoBit should not touch any
surfaces, since it has to be protected from any damage. ii)
After the insertion, the NanoBit has to rest in the cartridge
stable enough for the gripper to be retracted. iii) The NanoBit
should be well aligned with the entire cartridge structure. For
this reason a prototypical design is developed, which meets
these criteria. It is fabricated from conventional cantilevers
by focused ion beam (FIB)-treatment. The ﬁnal design is
shown in ﬁgure 2.
B. Automation Framework
The automation of all handling sequences is based on
a self-developed automation framework specialized on the
automation of micro- and nanohandling tasks. This software,
called OFFIS automation framework
1
, enables rapid proto-
typing and signiﬁcantly reduces design times.
The communication to all involved hardware components
(SEM, robotic stages, and gripper) is realized by remote-
controlled units providing a high-level access. These units
run as plugins inside the software framework..
The most common image processing algorithms are im-
plemented from OpenCV; some are self-developed. Complex
image processing pipelines can be created as chains. The au-
tomation environment allows for interaction with the image
processing from automation scripts.
Finally, the actual automation of tasks can be realized in
the high-level script language Python. The scripting level can
access all interfaces of the remote-controlled units and vision
chains. Hence, a vision based control loop can be established.
1
http://automation.ofﬁs.de/
5198
III. AUTOMATION IMPLEMENTATION
The automation of the assembly process is realized using
the SEM as only image source, in order to develop an
technique, which is even implementable in cost-efﬁcient
Desktop-SEMs. In the system at hand, the additional FIB
capability is used to verify the handling process afterwards,
and to build some microsystem components.
The entire system is set up as a dual closed-loop system,
engaging internal positioning sensors and visual servoing.
A. Implemented Algorithms
All automation sequences of this project are based on two
fundamental algorithms and approaches: template matching
and binary large object (BLOB)-detection. Coarse position
steps (up to 50 ?m, without intended contact of moved
objects) are performed based on absolute image information.
Regardless of the used detection technique, movements with
higher accuracy are realized by determining the actual and
target position from the same image and performing relative
movements.
Template Matching: The template matching is imple-
mented from the OpenCV library. It is used to realize three
different tasks:
For the gripping process, a simple template of a NanoBit
is used to detect all of them in an overview image of 50?m
edge length. In this step, the number and coarse positions of
the NanoBits are determined.
For the insertion process, the coarse position of the
receiving trench is determined in an overview image by a
simple template.
For both processes, the position of the gripper is derived
from the same overview image in the respective process.
BLOB detection: A BLOB detection algorithm is derived
from the OpenCV-contour-detection and is used for two
tasks:
1) The point of interest of the gripper is the so-called
gripping-point: the point where the distance to both gripper
jaws is the same and aligned with the tips of both jaws. The
automated determination of the gripping-point guarantees a
minimal uncertainty and high repeatability since it does not
depend on an operators sight (cf. ﬁgure 4).
2) The alignment of gripper and NanoBit during the
gripping process is realized using BLOB-detection. Template
matching doesn’t work for this task, since the edges are
important for this positioning task. (cf. ﬁgure 4).
Line-scan technique: A detached NanoBit has to be in-
serted into a cavity of the cartridge. For this reason, the
position of the NanoBit’s tip in respect to the gripping
point has to be determined exactly. For this, a line scanning
approach is used: by scanning a particular region line by
line and monitoring the grayscale distribution of each line,
the position of the highest outlier can be determined easily.
B. Application and Usage of SEM Environment
Image aquisition under SEM conditions involves particular
problems due to its working principle: An electron beam
is used in order to interact with atoms of the sample.
This interaction of fundamental particles results in a current
through the sample from the grounding. Hence, even a
conductive sample has a certain resistance depending on its
material properties and its geometry. In general, this can
cause local charging, which is not severe but effects the
path of the electron beam. This appears as static SEM-image
displacement[17].
These effects can be used as an information source for the
automation:
1) The topology dependency of the contrast for the so-
called secondary electron SEM can be used for depth-from-
shadow-detection[18]. In fact, it allows the alignment of two
objects with very high accuracy in z-direction.
2) The static image displacement can be exploited to
establish a powerful touch detection. The amount of displace-
ment depends on the charge of the sample, which effects a
deﬂection of the electron beam. This charge depends on the
equilibrium of the incoming electrons, the emitted electrons
and the resistance for the grounding current. For NanoBits
inside the gripper jaws, this resistance is comparably high,
since both are suspended on small structures. If another ob-
ject touches the NanoBits or the gripper jaws, this resistance
changes tremendously, which causes a discharging and hence
a change in the static displacement. This approach can be
called touch-detection-from-discharge.
C. Handling Sequence
Fig. 3. Process chart of the automated assembly process.
All handling steps (manually or automatically) are per-
formed using the same beam conﬁguration of the SEM: 7kV
beam energy, probe current index 10, size of the overview
image 50?m, focal-plane and all other SEM parameters
are constant. The only parameters which are changed are
the positions of the robotic platforms, the scanspeed of
the SEM and region of interests (ROIs) are set. The latter
5199
corresponds to image update rates between 0.5Hz (initial
overview images) and roughly 10Hz for small ROIs.
Few manual steps are required as prerequisites in order to
facilitate the automation:
1) A template of each object is needed: NanoBit, upper
gripper jaw, the reservoir’s cavity
2) two positions have to be stored for the coarse posi-
tioning system: i) a position where the NanoBits are visible
(x,y alignment) and in same orientation with the gripper
(?-alignment); all at the left side of the overview image;
the grippers uppermost position must be higher than the
NanoBits. ii) a position where the reservoir is visible at
the left side of the overview image; the grippers uppermost
position must be higher than the reservoir.
3) The ﬁrst automation sequence starts moving the gripper
to a center position, here the operator has to center the stage
of the SEM manually.
The complete cycle of the automation process is shown in
a process chart in 3. In general, all positioning and alignment
tasks apply to simple process rules:
1) Due to several image acquisition constraints for SEM-
images, working using an absolute coordination system is not
feasible for accuracy below a few ?m: Drift, charging and
beam deﬂection cause severe image distortions and limit the
reliability of global information.
2) In order to perform positioning steps requiring an accu-
racy better than few a ?m, the relative position information
of two objects is derived. The relative displacement of these
two positions can be transferred into a relative displacement
in the global coordination system. This approach is used for
all ﬁne positioning steps with accuracy down to a few dozen
nanometers.
3) The ﬁrst step of positioning/alignment is in x/y-plane
only. This is a straight-forward task, based on template
matching or BLOB-detection.
4) The second step is always the positioning/alignment in
z-direction. Since the derivation of this information from the
image is not sufﬁcient, the techniques depth-from-shadow
and touch-detection-from-discharge are used.
Calibration: The calibration of the entire visualization and
robotic system is needed as the ﬁrst step. During the calibra-
tion process, either the NanoBits sample or the reservoir is
close to the overview section in order to establish comparable
conditions for the electron beam. This ensures that the
calibration accounts for comparable image distortions.
Firstly, the gripper is moved to the center position. BLOB-
detection is used to detect both gripper jaws. From these two
objects the gripping point is extracted by calculation of the
point between both objects in alignment with the left edge.
Secondly, the gripper is moved to three points in the
image; two on the top and bottom left side, one on the right
side. The position of each point is measured in pixels by
template matching in the image coordination system. The
internal sensors of the PI system are used to measure the
corresponding position in the robotic coordination system.
Next, a transformation matrix is calculated, which allows to
transform all positions from the image coordination system
to the PI coordination system.
Finally, the z-movement of the PI system is calibrated,
since the entire setup is tilted by 5° to the optical axis of the
SEM. For this calibration, the gripper is placed in the center
position. Template matching is used to determine the x/y-
displacement in the uppermost and the lowermost z-position.
This value is used for a corrected z-movement, which allows
to lower the gripper in z-direction along the optical axis. The
drift in the y-direction is about 100nm/?m.
NanoBit Detachment: The NanoBit detachment sequence
starts in the overview pose and with initial SEM conditions;
NanoBits and gripper are visible at opposite ends of the
image. The NanoBits are detected and their positions de-
termined by template matching.
Secondly, the gripper is moved close to the selected
NanoBit, using the global coordinate system. In respect to the
NanoBit’s and gripper’s position, a ROI is activated covering
the gripper jaws tips and the handle of the NanoBit. BLOB-
detection is used to ﬁnd all three objects (both jaws and the
NanoBit) and relative look-and-move steps are performed in
order to achieve an optical alignment of gripper and NanoBit.
Thirdly, the gripper moves in one ?m-steps downwards till
the jaw shadows the NanoBit’s handle signiﬁcantly, which
is indicated by a grayscale drop of at least 20 units. The
movement continues until the minimum grayscale is found;
the movement is stopped when the grayscale increases back
to a ﬁfth of the maximum grayscale drop, in order to guar-
antee the detection of an actual minimum. This procedure
is repeated starting 3?m underneath the assumed position
with maximal shadowing. Now, the gripper moves upwards
in 100nm-steps, until the precise minimum value is found;
the NanoBit is presumably in the middle between the jaws.
For a proper determination of the grayscale, a scanspeed of 4
and a ten-fold averaging is chosen. Finally, the gripper moves
1.5?m to grasp the NanoBit at the lowest possible position
between the jaws. An overview image of this situation is
shown in ﬁgure 4.
Fourthly, the gripper closes and wiggles the NanoBit ﬁve
times with an increasing amplitude in the y-direction in
order to break the predetermined breaking point. Finally, the
gripper is retracted.
NanoBit Insertion: The NanoBit insertion sequence starts
in the overview pose and initial SEM conditions again;
reservoir and gripper including the grasp NanoBit are visible
at opposite ends of the image. The position of the receiving
cavities are determined by template matching.
Firstly, a relative calibration for the NanoBit’s tip is
performed. A ROI left of the jaws is scanned line by line, in
order to determine the tip of the NanoBit (cf. section III-A).
Thus, a relative x/y-calibration for the NanoBit is achieved
in respect to the gripper jaws. At the same time a template
of the NanoBit is acquired.
Secondly, the Nanobit has to be aligned in the x/y-plane
above the cavity. The NanoBit is placed 20 pixel beside the
detected cavity, in such way that the NanoBit does not mask
the cavity. Using a new ROI, a new determination of the
5200
Fig. 4. Gripping procedure: griping point is automatically determined and
aligned with the center axis of the NanoBit. Clearance between jaws and
NanoBits is about 200nm. Gripping depth is predetermined with 3?m.
Fig. 5. Scenario after the detachment of the NanoBit: the NanoBit is
clamped between the gripper jaws and the tip is fairly visible. The region
of interest left of the gripping point is scanned to determine the exact point
of the NanoBits tip.
NanoBit’s tip and the cavity is performed, which is used for
another look-and-move step, aligning the NanoBit exactly
above the cavity.
Thirdly, the actual insertion is done. This task is challeng-
ing, since a contact-detection failure can lead to the severe
damage of all components. A small ROI of a few ?m length
around the cavity is used to observe the insertion of the
NanoBit. Subsequently, the NanoBit is lowered in 100nm
steps. If the NanoBit or the gripper touches the surface of
the cartridge, the discharging leads to a signiﬁcant movement
of the image (cf. III-B).
Finally, the gripper is opened and retracted. Since only
the actuated, right jaw of the gripper moves, the NanoBit
moves to the right side, touches the reservoir, which limits
its movement. This reduces the contact surface to the gripper
jaw and allows an easy detaching.
IV. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
The experiments on the automation effort show positive
results and build a solid basis for further developments. The
combined hardware clearly provides a most suitable setup for
micro-automated operations inside the SEM and improved
previous setups. Furthermore, the control architecture is most
suitable and allows the development of automation script
prototypes within a few hours.
Over all, the repeatability of the different steps strongly
depends on the quality of the involved microsystem compo-
nents and the most crucial part is a well fabricated breaking
point of the NanoBits. Under the conditions at hand, the
breaking point had to be smaller than≤300nm. This is due to
the fact that the most critical process step is the detachment:
The NanoBit has to turn inside the gripper jaws properly and
the indented breaking point has to collapse fully. All failures
during this process result either in a total loss of the NanoBit,
or even worse in a situation where the NanoBit fully sticks
to one of gripper jaws inaccessibly.
A. NanoBit Detachment
Fig. 6. Comparison of six different z-approaches. The minimum grayscale
around 43.7?m indicated a maximal shadowing of the NanoBit, which
corresponds to a fully centered position. Maximal deviation is less than
200nm.
If the breaking point is well fabricated, the detaching
sequence shows a success rate of nearly 100%. The x/y-
alignment based on BLOB-detection achieves a high ac-
curacy with only 200nm clearance between gripper jaws
and NanoBit. The z-alignment approach shows a very high
repeatability. Figure 6 shows the grayscale values, which are
used to determine the optimal gripping position, depending
on the z-position of the gripper. The deviation between
all measurements is less than 200nm, which is more than
sufﬁcient for all subsequent tasks. A sideview by FIB con-
ﬁrms these results: The deviation of z-positions which are
measurable from this perspective is about 100nm.
The required process time for the detaching sequence
(including overview scan and retraction) is between 30 and
50 seconds, mainly depending on the height difference of
gripper and NanoBit.
B. NanoBit Insertion
Fig. 7. x and y position of the NanoBit determined by tempate matching
during the insertion process. Due to the discharge of the reservoir, the entire
image shift signiﬁcantly along the x axis.
The insertion sequence shows comparable success rates, at
which success also includes, that the NanoBit’s tip did not
5201
touch anything during the assembly sequence. An exemplary
measurement of the touch-detection-by-discharge approach is
shown in ﬁgure 7. The absolute movement of the template
shows signiﬁcant chances already on a corresponding z-
movement of 100nm.
Figure 8 shows a series of different insertion attempts.
In general, the NanoBits align well with the reservoir: the
average deviation is less than 5° in the x/y-plane and less
than 7° in the z-direction.
Fig. 8. Top- and corresponding sideview perspective of three exemplary
insertion approaches. The NanoBit is successfully inserted to the cavity and
is released.
The required process time for the insertion sequence
(including overview scan and retraction) is between 24 and
60 seconds, mainly depending in the height difference of
gripper, NanoBit and cartridge.
V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In conclusion, a successful automation of an assembly
process on the microscale has been demonstrated. Success
rates are high enough to build a promising basis for further
work. The hard- and software design is application proven
and guarantees a fast development for upcoming tasks.
Overall, the presented results are an excellent intermediate
result and build a promising basis for future developments
in the ﬁeld of micro- and nanorobotic automation.
The next logical perfections and developments in the
upcoming work will improve the results signiﬁcantly: A ﬁnal
after-insertion check of the NanoBit will allow to recognize
miss-alignments. In that case a repositioning of the NanoBit
can be performed.
Some more important work can be done on the optimiza-
tion of all image based steps: an optimal scanspeed and
averaging will decrease certain process step times.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the European Commission
in frame of the project NanoBits (257244). The authors
especially thank Prof. Peter Bøggild from DTU Denmark
for the excellent supply with grippers and NanoBits.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Brugger, R. A. Buser, and N. F. de Rooij, “Silicon cantilevers and
tips for scanning force microscopy,” Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 34,
no. 3, pp. 193–200, 1992.
[2] P. A. Rasmussen, J. Thaysen, S. Bouwstra, and A. Boisen, “Modular
design of AFM probe with sputtered silicon tip,” Sensors and
Actuators A: Physical, vol. 92, no. 1-3, pp. 96 – 101, 2001. [On-
line]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/B6THG-
43HJVDR-G/2/5c1627a4ed2fa1110418a0b61423d6dc
[3] Y. Wang and D. W. van der Weide, “Microfabrication and applica-
tion of high-aspect-ratio silicon tips,” Journal of Vacuum Science &
Technology B: Microelectronics and Nanometer Structures, vol. 23,
pp. 1582 – 1584, 2009.
[4] G. Dai, H. Wolff, H.-U. Danzebrink, and F. Pohlenz, German Patent
DE 10 2005 057 218 A1, 2005.
[5] Y. Martin and H. K. Wickramasinghe, German Patent DE 693 12 412
T2, 1993.
[6] V. Eichhorn, D. Jasper, F. Krohs, P. Bøggild, S. Fahlbusch, M. Oliva,
O. Krause, H. Haschke, and S. Fatikow, “NanoBits: Exchangeable
and customizable scanning probe tips as a versatile tool for nanoscale
applications,” in Proceedings of the 7th International Workshop on
Microfactories, Daejeon, Korea, October 24-27 2010, pp. 1–6.
[7] A. Savenko, I. Yildiz, and P. Bggild, “Out-of-plane bending
based on sin-ion-irradiation and bilayer structures for easy
access for micromanipulation,” Microelectronic Engineering, vol.
110, no. 0, pp. 398 – 402, 2013. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167931713001913
[8] R. T. Rajendra Kumar, S. U. Hassan, O. Sardan, V. Eichhorn, F. Krohs,
S. Fatikow, and P. Bøggild, “Nanobits: customisable scanning probe
tips,” Nanotechnology, vol. 20, no. 39, p. 395703 (6pp), 2009.
[9] M. Bartenwerfer, V. Eichhorn, D. Jasper, S. Fatikow, A. Savenko,
D. H. Petersen, B. Malm, and P. Bøggild, “Automated Handling and
Assembly of Customizable AFM-Tips,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Symposium on Assembly and Manufacturing (ISAM’11),
Tampere, Finland, May 25-27 2011, pp. 1–6.
[10] A. Savenko, P. Bøggild, B. Malm, D. H. Petersen, and I. Yilddiz, “High
precision FIB fabrication of customizable AFM probes,” in Proc. of
the55th International Conference on Electron, Ion, and Photon Beam
Technology and Nanofabrication (EIPBN-2011), Las Vegas, USA,
May 31 June 3 2011.
[11] M. Bartenwerfer, V. Eichhorn, S. Fatikow, M. Becker, A. Savenko,
I. Yildiz, and P. Bøggild, “Design of a Micro-Cartridge System for
the Robotic Assembly of Exchangeable AFM-Probe Tips,” in Proc. of
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
Karlsruhe, Germany, May 6-10 2013, pp. 1722–1727.
[12] M. Becker, M. Bartenwerfer, V. Eichhorn, O. Krause, and T. Sulzbach,
“Cantilever Based Connector Platform for Exchangeable and Cus-
tomizable Scanning Probe Tips,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 47, pp.
220–223, 2012.
[13] S. Fatikow, C. Dahmen, T. Wortmann, and R. Tunnell, “Visual
Feedback Methods for nanohandling Automation,” I. J. Information
Acquisition, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 159–169, 2009.
[14] Y. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Ru, Y. L. Zhang, L. Dong, and Y. Sun, “Piezore-
sistivity Characterization of Synthetic Silicon Nanowires Using a
MEMS Device,” Microelectromechanical Systems, Journal of, vol. 20,
no. 4, pp. 959–967, Aug 2011.
[15] X. Ye, Y. Zhang, C. Ru, J. Luo, S. Xie, and Y. Sun, “Automated
pick-place of silicon nanowires,” Automation Science and Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 554–561, 2013.
[16] K. N. Andersen, D. H. Petersen, K. Carlson, K. Mølhave, O. Sardan,
A. Horsewell, V. Eichhorn, S. Fatikow, and P. Bøggild, “Multimodal
Electrothermal Silicon Microgrippers for Nanotube Manipulation,”
IEEE Transactions on Nanotechnology, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 76–85,
January 2009.
[17] L. Reimer, Scanning Electron Microscopy: Physics of Image For-
mation and Microanalysis, 2nd ed., ser. Springer Series in Optical
Sciences. Springer, 1998, vol. 45.
[18] V. Eichhorn, S. Fatikow, T. Wich, C. Dahmen, T. Sievers, K. N.
Andersen, K. Carlson, and P. Bøggild, “Depth-detection methods
for microgripper based CNT manipulation in a scanning electron
microscope,” Journal of Micro-Nano Mechatronics, vol. 4, no. 1-2,
pp. 27–36, 2008.
5202
