Robot Assisted Gas Tomography - Localizing Methane Leaks in
Outdoor Environments
Victor Hernandez Bennetts
1
, Erik Schaffernicht
1
, Todor Stoyanov
1
, Achim J. Lilienthal
1
and Marco Trincavelli
1
Abstract— In this paper we present an inspection robot to
produce gas distribution maps and localize gas sources in
large outdoor environments. The robot is equipped with a
3D laser range ﬁnder and a remote gas sensor that returns
integral concentration measurements. We apply principles of
tomography to create a spatial gas distribution model from
integral gas concentration measurements. The gas distribution
algorithm is framed as a convex optimization problem and it
models the mean distribution and the ﬂuctuations of gases. This
is important since gas dispersion is not an static phenomenon
and furthermore, areas of high ﬂuctuation can be correlated
with the location of an emitting source. We use a compact
surface representation created from the measurements of the
3D laser range ﬁnder with a state of the art mapping algorithm
to get a very accurate localization and estimation of the path
of the laser beams. In addition, a conic model for the beam of
the remote gas sensor is introduced. We observe a substantial
improvement in the gas source localization capabilities over
previous state-of-the-art in our evaluation carried out in an
open ﬁeld environment.
I. INTRODUCTION
Detecting and localizing methane leaks is a relevant task
for a variety of applications such as pipeline inspection [1],
coal mine surveillance [2] and landﬁll monitoring [3]. Mobile
robot olfaction, the sub-ﬁeld of robotics, which develops
robots with gas sensing capabilities, began its development
in the early 1990s and until the early 2000s the gas sen-
sitive robots were deployed in controlled mock-up environ-
ments [4]. Those robots were mostly trying to track an odour
plume to the source using in-situ gas sensors (e.g. MOX
sensors) and anemometers to sense the airﬂow [5]. More
recently, other tasks for gas sensitive mobile robots like gas
distribution mapping, leak localization, gas discrimination
have been addressed. However, robots equipped with in-situ
gas sensors need to enter the plume in order to detect and
eventually identify the gas, which limits the applicability
of gas sensing mobile robots. Recently, remote gas sensors
based on Tunable Diode Absorption Spectroscopy (TDLAS)
became commercially available. Some commercially avail-
able TDLAS devices can sense a speciﬁc gas (e.g. methane)
up to a distance of 30 m without reﬂective mirrors. Remote
gas sensors provide integral concentration measurements but
no information about the distance travelled by the diode’s
beam or the gas distribution over the optical path.
The process of generating gas distribution maps from
integral concentration measurements is referred to gas to-
1
AASS Research Centre, School of Science and Technology,
¨
Orebro Uni-
versity, Fakultetsgatan 1,
¨
Orebro, Sweden name.surname@oru.se
mography [6]. Gas tomography requires, besides integral
concentration measurements, information regarding the path
travelled by the sensor’s beam. In measurement conﬁgura-
tions where the sensor is not ﬁxed in a known position, the
beam trajectory has to be estimated. Thus, gas tomography
becomes heavily dependent on accurate ray tracing.
In this paper we present a robot equipped with a TDLAS
and other sensing modalities that allow for accurate local-
ization and beam tracing. We then use the localized beams
to perform gas distribution modelling and the approach is
evaluated in a large outdoor scenario. This work builds upon
the results presented in [7] and improves them in many
aspects. First, not only the map of the mean gas distribution is
computed, but also a map of the variance (i.e. ﬂuctuations) of
the gas concentrations is built. The spatial distribution of the
gas ﬂuctuations can provide implicit information about the
gas dispersion phenomenon. More speciﬁcally, areas of high
concentration variance can be correlated to the proximity of a
gas source [8]. Second, instead of using a coarse localization
based on GPS data and odometry, a more precise system
based on a 3D lidar and Normal Distributions Transforms
(NDT) occupancy maps is employed. The improved localiza-
tion accuracy allows for a much more accurate registration
of the sensor readings in the maps, which results in better
gas distribution models.
The paper is organized as follows. We will give an
overview on remote gas sensing in general and its connection
to robotics in Section II, before describing our robotic
platform and the used sensors in Section III. Algorithms for
performing robot localization, ray tracing and gas tomog-
raphy are presented and discussed in Section IV. Section
V describes the used experimental set up and results are
reported in Section VI.
II. REMOTE GAS SENSING
Remote sensing emerged in the early 1990s when the
development of new technologies allowed to measure gas
concentrations without physically interacting with the target
analytes. Remote sensors based on optical principles have
gained momentum due to their high sensitivity, selectivity
and stability [9].
A common principle in optical remote sensing is absorp-
tion spectroscopy, which measures the energy attenuation
caused by molecules of a target gas at narrow bands of the
electromagnetic spectrum. TDLAS sensors emit a laser beam
tuned at the absorption band of the target gas. The laser diode
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6362
is modulated in a way that the emitted beam is driven on
and off of the wavelength of interest. During this process,
the power of the beam is measured continuously and, by
comparing the measurements when the beam is on the target
wavelength against the measurements when the beam is off,
it is possible to determine, with high degree of selectivity,
whether the emitted beam has traversed a target gas patch
or not. Instead of providing a point measurement in parts
per million (ppm), as in the case of in-situ sensing, remote
sensors provide integral concentration measurement in parts
per million meters (ppmm), with no information regarding
the path followed by the beam or the distribution of the gas
along the optical path.
Remote gas sensing can bring key beneﬁts in the context of
mobile robotics olfaction. Given that the robot does not need
to physically travel to the location of a gas cloud to sample
a measurement, larger exploration areas can be covered in
shorter time and locations such as roofs and chimneys can
be reached. In [10], a robot equipped with a TDLAS sensor
was used to detect gas leaks in industrial environments using
an ad-hoc triangulation algorithm. While the robot was able
to travel towards the location of a leak, the performance of
the algorithm heavily depended on the strong assumption
that the detected concentration is located at the end of the
beam. Grinham et al. [11] proposed a system to improve the
quantiﬁcation of CH
4
released rates from a water storage
site. The authors mounted a single-path optical methane
detector to an autonomous vessel and the collected data
allowed the authors to identify areas of highCH
4
ebullition
and predict release rates.
Computed Tomography for Gases (CTG) is the task of
deriving gas distribution models from localized integral
concentration measurements [6], [12]. CTG models can be
either pixel-based or parametric. In the ﬁrst approach, the
model is given by a lattice in which, the concentration at
each cell is estimated from a set of integral concentration
measurements [13]. The latter approach, uses the integral
measurements to ﬁt the functional parameters of a set of n
basis functions [14]. In this work, we present a pixel-based
CTG algorithm.
While CTG has been proven feasible, a common approach
is to use ﬁxed sensing conﬁgurations, where the emitting
diodes/reﬂectors are placed in predeﬁned positions and there-
fore, the optical path of the beams are known. In the context
of robots equipped with remote gas sensors, the estimation
of the optical path is heavily determined by the accuracy of
the robot’s localization algorithm. The work presented in [7]
is the ﬁrst attempt towards robot assisted gas tomography.
III. THE ROBOTIC PLATFORM
The Gasbot prototype (originally introduced in [7]), shown
in Fig. 1, is an all-terrain Husky A-200 robot equipped
with different sensing modalities for robot localization and
environmental monitoring. In this work, the TDLAS (Sew-
erin RMLD) sensor is used to measure CH
4
, the 3D Lidar
(VelodineHDL 32E) is used for localization purposes and
the GPS unit (Xsens MTi-G) is used for evaluation purposes.
No other sensing modalities are considered.
Fig. 1. Robotic platform ”Gasbot”. The sensors that are used in this paper
are explained in the text.
The Remote Methane Leak Detector (RMLD) from Sew-
erin
1
can work in open loop with no mirrors required for
reﬂection of the beam. According to the manufacturer’s
data sheets, the RMLD is able to measure CH
4
integral
concentrations as low as 10ppmm at distances up to 30m.
Fig. 2 exempliﬁes the measurement principle of the RMLD.
The sensor is mounted on top of a Pan-Tilt unit (PTU)
PW-70, which allows to point the laser beam at different
orientations, between120

in the tilting axis and 360

in
the panning axis. The HDL  32E
2
is a compact device
that allows to generate point clouds of up to 700,000 points
per second with a range of 100 meters and an accuracy of
0:02 m at 10 Hz.
Fig. 2. Measurement principle of the RMLD. In the example, the device
reports an integral concentration measurement of 590 ppm m when the
infra-red beams travels a 10m path in which, a background concentration
level of 10 ppm and a CH
4
patch of 500 ppm are present.
1
http://www.sewerin.com/cms/en/products/gas/
gas-leak-detection-outdoors/sewerin-rmld.html
2
http://velodynelidar.com/lidar/hdlproducts/
hdl32e.aspx
6363
IV. ALGORITHMS
A. 3D Model Acquisition
A map of the environment is created using the recently
proposed NDT fusion algorithm [15]. The NDT fusion
algorithm is based on the Normal Distribution Transforms
(NDT) framework and its Occupancy Map extension (NDT-
OM, [16]). In the NDT framework, the exploration area is
discretised and individual Gaussian probability density func-
tions (pdf) are ﬁtted using the measurement points that lie
within the voxels in the lattice. Among different localization
algorithms, NDT based approaches offer smooth likelihood
models, that allow for very accurate localization [17].
The NDT fusion algorithm iterates between two steps. The
track step of the algorithm performs an NDT-D2D registra-
tion [18] between the acquired range scan and the map. Once
the tracking step has converged to a candidate pose, the new
point cloud is inserted in the map using an efﬁcient batch-
update ray tracing procedure. The NDT fusion framework is
applied directly to obtain consistent vehicle pose estimates
and an incrementally constructed environmental map.
B. Ray Tracing
Tracing a ray through an NDT-OM map is a common
operation, performed whenever new 3D range measurements
are acquired. In this work however, ray tracing is also used
to estimate the path associated with each measurement beam
of the TDLAS sensor. The beam’s starting point is estimated
using the position and orientation of the gas sensor, relative
to the robot’s pose in the map. Then, a ray is traced from the
start point through the map and the point of intersection is
then obtained as the maximum likelihood point x
ML
along
the ray, given the Gaussian pdf in each traversed cell. If the
likelihood is high enough, then the ray is likely to hit the
distribution and x
ML
is considered as the beam’s endpoint.
C. Gas Distribution Mapping
The measurements of a Tunable Diode Laser Absorption
Spectroscopy (TDLAS) sensor are line integrals of the gas
concentration over the distance travelled by the beam. This
scenario is similar to computer assisted tomography (CAT),
where the image of a body of interest is reconstructed from
a set of attenuation measurements of e.g. X-rays beams. The
major difference is that bones are ﬁxed while performing the
CAT measurements, while gas disperses in the environment
due to airﬂow advection and turbulence causing the gas
distribution to be very dynamic. We will therefore estimate
a model of the gas distribution that captures its statistical
properties. We consider a polyhedral region that includes
the volume for which the methane distribution map has to
be produced. We divide the polyhedral region in a uniform
grid of cubic cells. The purpose of the algorithm presented
here is the estimation of the mean and variance of the
methane concentration in each cell in the lattice from a set of
TDLAS measurements. We start from the assumption that the
statistics of the gas distribution (mean and variance) in each
cell are constant over the duration of the experiments. No
assumption is made about the spatial distribution of gases or
  
l
15
a
23
a
23
Fig. 3. Example scenario in which a measurement has been taken in an area
described by a 46 lattice, with the sensor being placed in cell 10 and the
laser being reﬂected on the ground in cell 23. Shown are the two different
sensor models, line and cone. First, the dashed line represents the idealized
beam model. It computes the length l the beam travels through each cell
(depicted for cell 15). In this case, the measure obtained by the TDLAS
sensor isy
beam
=l
10
x
10
+l
14
x
14
+l
15
x
15
+l
19
x
19
+l
23
x
23
+ where
 is the measurement noise. The second model is the more realistic cone
model. The area of intersectiona of the cone and each grid cell is computed,
an example is shown in cell 23. The measurement is then expressed as
ycone = a
10
x
10
+a
11
x
11
+a
14
x
14
+a
15
x
15
+a
19
x
19
+a
20
x
20
+
a
23
x
23
+a
24
x
24
+:
the number of emitting sources present in the environment.
In order to simplify the explanation, we consider a two
dimensional example in Fig. 3.
As a further simpliﬁcation, we will ﬁrst consider that the
measurement represents a line integral of the gas concentra-
tion over the path travelled by the beam. Therefore, we can
write every measurement as:
y =
M
X
i=1
l
i
x
i
+ =l
T
x+ (1)
wherey is the TDLAS reading,M is the number of cells,
l
i
is the distance travelled by the beam in celli,x
i
is the gas
concentration in celli, and is the measurement noise term.
As a more realistic model of the real sensor , we model the
laser as a cone instead of a beam. The cone is approximated
by an isosceles triangle and we consider the area integral of
the intersection of this triangle with the grid cell a
i
instead
of the line integral. Eq. 1 for the line model can again be
used after substituting l with a in all cases.
In order to calculate the likelihood of the integral mea-
surements, we assume Gaussian noise with zero mean and
standard deviation :
p(yjx;l;) =N(yjl
T
x;) (2)
Now, having a set of N measurements, the problem of
gas distribution mapping can be formulated as the problem
to estimate the vector of concentrations x that maximizes
the likelihood of the measurements. Given a set of N
measurements, we can deﬁne a vectory[N1] that contains
all the measurement values, a vectorx[M1] that contains
the concentration in the cells, and a matrix L[NM] that
contains the line or area integral, respectively, that each
measurement ray tracing produced. Therefore, the whole
dataset of measurements can be described by the following
matrix equation:
6364
y =Lx+1 (3)
The likelihood of the measurements assuming Gaussian
noise is:
p(yjx;L;) =
N
Y
n=1
N(y
n
jLx;) (4)
Maximizing the logarithm of the likelihood (equivalent to
maximizing the likelihood itself) boils down to the following
non negative least squares problem, which imposes the
constraint x  0, i.e. that gas concentrations have to be
positive:
minimize
x
kLx yk
2
2
(5)
subject to x0
If some cells are never observed or many measurements
are highly correlated the problem may become underdeter-
mined and therefore it is useful to introduce a regularization
term, modifying the problem in the following way:
minimize
x
kLx yk
2
2
+kxk
2
2
(6)
subject to x0
which is analogous to choosing a Gaussian prior with zero
mean on the average concentration of the cells. The strength
of the prior is governed by the hyper-parameter . In our
experiment we heuristically set  = 10
 5
, since we want to
impose a weak prior. In our numerical results, we observe
that the constraintx0 is never active, which implies that
the obtained solution is the ordinary least squares solution
^ x = (L
T
L)
 1
L
T
y. The case in which some entries of
^ x are equal to zero is of theoretical interest only and is
not practically relevant. This estimator is unbiased which
means that E[^ x] = x

, where x

is the true value of the
mean concentration in the cells. The covariance matrix of
the estimator is:
cov(^ x) =E[(^ x x

)(^ x x

)
T
] = (7)
= (L
T
L)
 1
L
T
E[
T
]L(L
T
L)
 1
= (8)
= (L
T
L)
 1
L
T
(
2
I)L(L
T
L)
 1
=
2
(L
T
L)
 1
(9)
The diagonal elements of the covariance matrix are the
variance of the estimators of the individual parameters, i.e.
the variance of the gas concentration in each cell. We are left
with the estimation of the variance of the process noise 
2
.
If we call the vector of residuals r =y L^ x, the variance
of r is:
var(r) =E[r
T
r] =E[tr(rr
T
)] =tr(E[rr
T
]) = (10)
=tr(E[M11
T
M
T
]) =tr(ME[11
T
]M) =
(11)
=
2
tr(M
2
) =
2
tr(M) =
2
(N M) (12)
Fig. 4. (a) The Gasbot platform patrolling the experimental area. (b)
Artiﬁcial CH
4
gas source.
where M = I  L(L
T
L)
 1
L
T
is a symmetric and
idempotent matrix. An unbiased estimator of 
2
is:
s
2
=
r
T
r
N M
(13)
For more detailed explanations on the derivations of the
formula the interested reader can consult [19].
V. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Experiments were conducted near the
¨
Orebro University’s
main campus (Fig. 4(a)), where an artiﬁcial gas source was
placed. The gas source was a ﬂask of natural gas ( 90%
CH
4
) connected to a tube ring punctured in multiple places.
In order to diffuse the jet-like emissions coming from the
punctures, a permeable mat was used to cover the ring (4(b)).
During the experimental trials, the ambient temperature was
16

C with a moderate wind ﬂow of 1:6 m=s.
Two experiments were carried out in which the robot
was remotely commanded to follow different exploration
paths inside areas of approximately 154 m
2
and 432 m
2
respectively. The total exploration time was approximately
1200 s in both cases. During the exploration, the robot was
stopping to collect gas measurements. At each stop position,
the PTU was used to scan the neighbouring area in a con-
tinuous sweeping movement with apertures of ( 70

;70

)
and ( 8

; 2

) in pan and tilt respectively. The RMLD was
always pointing towards the ground (grass surface), which
was used as reﬂective surface. No artiﬁcial reﬂectors were
introduced in the experimental location.
VI. RESULTS
Since accurate ground truth on the real gas distribution is,
with currently available instrumentation, impossible to ac-
quire in generic uncontrolled environments like the presented
experimental setup, we evaluate the gas distribution models
according to their capability to predict the location of the gas
source. In [7], bottles ﬁlled with methane were successfully
localized using the maximum of the mean concentration map
as an indicator. Here we show that in real world scenarios,
where methane is dispersed in the environment from a
leaking gas source and not conﬁned into static volumes,
the maximum of the concentration variance map, one of the
novelties proposed in this paper, is a much better indicator of
the position of the gas source. Fig. 5 shows example maps
6365
Fig. 5. Mean and variance of the gas distribution for various map resolutions. The green marker indicates the true position of the gas source, while the
blue marker indicates the estimated position of the gas source (maximum of the mean/variance map).
(a) (b)
Fig. 6. Gas source localization accuracy. (a) First experimental run (explored area 154 m
2
). (b) Second experimental run (explored area 432 m
2
).
obtained for various cell sizes in one of our experimental
runs. In order to numerically evaluate the improvements
introduced by the NDT based localization and the conic
beam model we divide the two datasets into 5 folds each and
calculate errorbars for the accuracy of the gas source position
estimation. Figure 6(a) and 6(b) show the results for the two
experimental runs. From the distances between the real and
estimated gas source position, it is clear that the maximum of
the variance map (errors consistently below 10m) provides a
better indicator of the gas source position than the maximum
of the mean map (errors between 25m and 35m). Focusing
the attention on the predictions obtained with the variance
map, we can see how in general the positioning and ray
tracing obtained with the NDT model (errors in the order
of 2m  4m) outperform the positioning based on ﬁltered
GPS and odometry (errors around 10m) presented in [7].
Regarding the comparison of the beam models, we can see
how the models obtained with the conical beam model (errors
between 1m and 4m) clearly outperform the models based
on the line beam model in the second experimental run, while
in the ﬁrst experimental run, a clear difference is visible only
for cell sizes 3m.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we present an approach for robot assisted gas
tomography. The contributions of this paper, which builds
upon the work presented in [7], are three-fold. First a state-
of-the-art NDT-OM localization system, which uses the input
from a 3D LIDAR and the odometry of the robot, is used for
accurately localizing the beams of the TDLAS sensor. This
results in higher quality gas distribution maps. We improved
a previously proposed gas distribution mapping algorithm so
that it estimates not only the mean but also of the variance
of gas concentration. Third, a more realistic conic shaped
sensor model is proposed instead of the previously used line
model. It is worth noting that the proposed system has been
evaluated on a large experimental area similar to the one
where fully ﬂedged gas inspection robots could be deployed
(e.g. a decommissioned landﬁll). While no ground truth
evaluation could be performed performed with respect to
6366
the predictive capabilities of the gas distribution models, we
observed that the maximum of the variance map (computed
with a conic model and with a more accurate 3D environment
representation), is a much better indicator of the position of
the gas source than the maximum of the mean map. This
result is supported by previous work in which, measurements
on turbulent underwater plumes show that the magnitude of
the concentration ﬂuctuations exhibit a steeper gradient along
the downstream direction that the average concentration [20].
Several aspects require further investigation, which is
deferred to future works. First, the performance of the gas
distribution algorithm clearly depends on the choice of the
cell size. A large cell size may lead to an oversimpliﬁed gas
distribution model, while a small cell size may introduce
estimation errors since the measurements cannot support
such a complicated model. This particular instance of the
well known bias-variance (model selection) dilemma may
be solvable by a cross-validation approach similar to the one
used for other gas distribution mapping algorithms like the
Kernel DM+V (e.g. [21]).
Second, the choice of the location of the measurement
clearly affects the quality of the model. The choice of the
measurement points will most probably result from a trade-
off between the desired quality of the model and the time
needed to explore the whole area of interest.
Third, gas dispersion is a highly dynamic phenomenon and
thus, the assumption of time invariant gas distribution models
does not hold. This problem has been explored for in-situ gas
sensors [22], [23] and a proposed solution is to consider the
time stamps of the acquired concentration measurement in
such a way that recent measurements are more signiﬁcant
when computing the gas distribution models.
Additional experiments are needed to thoroughly validate
the proposed approach. These experiments should be carried
out in locations other than open areas. For example, outdoor
locations occluded by buildings/obstacles, uneven terrains or
urban locations. Furthermore, a grid of in-situ gas sensors
could be added to provide ground truth concentration mea-
surements for evaluation purposes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank Robotdalen, for funding
this work as part of the Gasbot project (project number
8140), and Clearpath Robotics, for providing the Husky A-
200 robotic platform through its PartnerBot program.
REFERENCES
[1] R. A. Alvarez, S. W. Pacala, J. J. Winebrake, W. L. Chameides, and
S. P. Hamburg, “Greater focus needed on methane leakage from natural
gas infrastructure,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 109, no. 17, pp. 6435–6440, 2012.
[2] M. A. Meybodi and M. Behnia, “Australian coal mine methane emis-
sions mitigation potential using a stirling engine-based chp system,”
Energy Policy, vol. 62, no. 0, pp. 10 – 18, 2013.
[3] V . Hernandez Bennetts, A. J. Lilienthal, P. Neumann, and M. Trin-
cavelli, “Mobile robots for localizing gas emission sources on landﬁll
sites: Is bio-inspiration the way to go?”FrontiersinNeuroengineering,
vol. 4, no. 20, 2012.
[4] G. Kowadlo and R. A. Russell, “Robot Odor Localization: A Tax-
onomy and Survey,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 27, no. 8, pp. 869 – 894, 2008.
[5] A. J. Lilienthal, A. Loutﬁ, and T. Duckett, “Airborne chemical sensing
with mobile robots,” Sensors, vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 1616–1678, 2006.
[6] P. Price, M. Fischer, A. Gadgil, and R. Sextro, “An algorithm for
real-time tomography of gas concentrations, using prior information
about spatial derivatives,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 35, no. 16,
pp. 2827–2835, 2001.
[7] V . Hernandez Bennetts, A. Lilienthal, A. A. Khaliq, V . Pomareda Sese,
and M. Trincavelli, “Towards real-world gas distribution mapping and
leak localization using a mobile robot with 3d and remote gas sensing
capabilities,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013, pp. 2327–2332.
[8] S. Asadi, M. Reggente, C. Stachniss, C. Plagemann, and A. J. Lilien-
thal, Intelligent Systems for Machine Olfaction: Tools and Methodolo-
gies. IGI Global, 2011.
[9] X. Liu, S. Cheng, H. Liu, S. Hu, D. Zhang, and H. Ning, “A survey
on gas sensing technology,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 7, pp. 9635–9665,
2012.
[10] G. Bonow and A. Kroll, “Gas leak localization in industrial environ-
ments using a tdlas-based remote gas sensor and autonomous mobile
robot with the tri-max method,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2013 IEEE International Conference on, May 2013, pp. 987–992.
[11] A. Grinham, M. Dunbabin, D. Gale, and J. Udy, “Quantiﬁcation of
ebullitive and diffusive methane release to atmosphere from a water
storage,” Atmospheric Environment, vol. 45, no. 39, pp. 7166 – 7173,
2011.
[12] R. Byer, “Two-dimensional remote air-pollution monitoring via to-
mography,” Optics Letters, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 75–77, 1979.
[13] M. Trincavelli, V . Bennetts, and A. Lilienthal, “A least squares
approach for learning gas distribution maps from a set of integral gas
concentration measurements obtained with a tdlas sensor,” in Sensors,
2012 IEEE, Oct 2012, pp. 1–4.
[14] A. Drescher, A. Gadgil, P. Price, and W. Nazaroff, “Novel approach for
tomographic reconstruction of gas concentration distributions in air:
Use of smooth basis functions and simulated annealing,” Atmospheric
Environment, vol. 30, no. 6, pp. 929–940, 1996.
[15] T. Stoyanov, J. Saarinen, H. Andreasson, and A. Lilienthal, “Normal
distributions transform occupancy map fusion: Simultaneous mapping
and tracking in large scale dynamic environments,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, Nov 2013, pp. 4702–4708.
[16] J. Saarinen, H. Andreasson, T. Stoyanov, J. Ala-Luhtala, and A. Lilien-
thal, “Normal distributions transform occupancy maps: Application to
large-scale online 3d mapping,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2013 IEEE International Conference on, May 2013, pp. 2233–2238.
[17] J. Saarinen, H. Andreasson, T. Stoyanov, and A. Lilienthal, “Nor-
mal distributions transform monte-carlo localization (ndt-mcl),” in
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, Nov 2013, pp. 382–389.
[18] T. Stoyanov, M. Magnusson, and A. J. Lilienthal, “Fast and accurate
scan registration through minimization of the distance between com-
pact 3d ndt representations,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 31, pp. 1377–1393, 2012.
[19] C. Heij, P. de Boer, P. H. Franses, T. Kloek, and H. K. van Dijk,
Econometric Methods with Applications in Business and Economics.
Oxford University Press, 2004.
[20] D. Webster, S. Rahman, and L. Dasi, “Laser-induced ﬂuorescence mea-
surements of a turbulent plume,” Journal of Engineering Mechanics,
vol. 129, no. 10, pp. 1130–1137, 2003.
[21] A. J. Lilienthal, M. Reggente, M. Trincavelli, J. L. Blanco, and
J. Gonzalez, “A statistical approach to gas distribution modelling with
mobile robots the kernel dm+v algorithm,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), October 11 - October 15 2009, pp. 570–576.
[22] J. G. Monroy, “Advances in gas sensing and mapping for mobile
robotics,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Malaga, nov 2013.
[23] S. Asadi, S. Pashami, A. Loutﬁ, and A. J. Lilienthal, “Td kernel
dm+v: Time-dependent statistical gas distribution modelling on sim-
ulated measurements,” in AIP Conference Proceedings Volume 1362:
Olfaction and Electronic Nose - Proceedings of the 14th International
SymposiumonOlfactionandElectronicNose(ISOEN), 2011, pp. 281–
283.
6367
