Self-folding mobile microrobots for biomedical applications
Stefano Fusco
1
, Mahmut Selman Sakar
1
, Stephen Kennedy
2
, Christian Peters
3
, Salvador Pane
1
, David Mooney
2
,
and Bradley J. Nelson
1
Abstract—Thepresentedmicroroboticplatformcombinesthe
advantages of self-folding NIR light sensitive polymer bilayers,
magnetic alginate microbeads, and a 3D manipulation system
andintroducesasolutionfortargeted,on-demanddrugandcell
delivery. First feasibility studies are presented together with the
potential of the full design.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, several miniaturized devices were devel-
oped for minimally invasive interventions. They can poten-
tially increase the quality and the efﬁciency of surgeries or
therapies, minimizing at the same time the risks and the pain
for the patients [1]. One successful example is the Pillcam,
a centimeter scale pill-sized wireless camera developed for
performing endoscopy in the gastrointestinal tract. The abil-
ity to guide untethered microtools inside the human body to
target locations is an important feature and wireless magnetic
manipulation offers great promise [2], [3]. Several groups
demonstrated magnetic steering of microrobots in vivo for
opthalmic interventions [4], biopsy [5], and cancer therapy
[6].
It is highly desirable to trigger and/or regulate the func-
tionality of individual or groups of magnetic microrobots
with external cues for spatiotemporally controlled delivery of
biological agents (e.g., drugs and cells). Dynamical control
over delivery can potentially improve the efﬁciency of the
agents, and permit new therapies. In this work, we intro-
duce externally triggered soft-bodied mobile microrobots for
on-demand cell and drug delivery. The overall concept is
summarized in Figure 1. The soft body of the microrobot
would permit adaptive and safe maneuvering inside target
organs and cavities.
We fabricated hydrogel bilayers with bioinspired mor-
phologies (Jellyﬁsh or Venus Flytrap) using conven-
tional 2D photolithography. A double step process was
used to couple a graphene oxide nanocomposite of a
highly swelling thermoresponsive hydrogel layer (based
on N-isopropylacrylamide, NIPAAm), with a layer of
polyethylenglycol-diacrylate (PEGDA). Different expansion
properties of layers results in an inhomogeneous expan-
sion/shrinking along a certain direction which leads to self-
folding (see Figure 2). The devices have switchable and
1
Institute of Robotics and Intelligent Systems, ETH Zurich, 8092
Zurich, Switzerland. email: sakarm@ethz.ch
2
Wyss Institute of Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard Univer-
sity, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
3
Institute of Micro and Nanosystems, ETH Zurich, 8092 Zurich,
Switzerland
Fig. 1. Principle of photoactivatable magnetic microrobots. An increase
of temperature allows the controlled encapsulation and release of cell laden
magnetic microbeads. The full platform is then magnetically steered to the
target location and actuated by NIR light (induces heating) to deliver the
payload.
reversible properties and can perform on-demand tasks as
the transition can be controlled by external stimuli [7], [8].
The ﬁrst layer was speciﬁcally designed to collapse at
temperatures higher than 40

C or by short exposure to a
NIR laser source. The second and passive layer was used
to achieve complete folding of the ﬁnal structures upon
immersion into water. As a result, the microstructures can
encapsulate and protect magnetic alginate microbeads in their
folded state. The bead-carrying microrobots were steered by
means of a 5-DOF electromagnetic manipulation system [9].
They were actuated by short exposure to a NIR laser source,
which led to the release of the encapsulated microbeads and
the modiﬁcation of the drug release from the bilayers.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Fabrication of Hydrogel Bilayers
The microdevices are the result of a double photolitho-
graphic process [10], where the different layers are subse-
quently created, without any alignment, by backside expo-
sure on a glass photomask (Figure 3). The hydrogel solutions
were inserted by means of capillary forces in between the
mask, and a bottom silicon substrate, with SU-8 spacers of
deﬁned thickness. The shape of the structures were designed
to form closed compartments after self-folding.
The masks were printed on plastic foil (Selba S.A,
Switzerland) and reproduced on glass wafers by photolithog-
raphy using the photoresist AZ4562. A 100 nm chromium
layer was subsequently evaporated on the substrates, and
removed from the featured areas by dissolving the photoresist
in acetone and isopropanol. The ﬁnal masks were then
coated with a lift off sacriﬁcial adhesive layer to provide
uniform adhesion of the hydrogel layers. SU-8 spacers of
different thicknesses (from 10 to 40 mm) were prepared by
photolithography on SiO2 substrates. A non adhesive silane
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3777
Stressed Condition  Relaxed State 
Stimuli Responsive Layer 
Non-responsive Layer 
Fig. 2. Folding of 2D thin ﬁlms happens as a result of an inhomogeneous
expansion/shrinking along a certain direction. This can be achieved by
coupling two layers with different expansion properties. Moreover, if one
of these layers undergoes active or controlled shape transition, this would
result in a controlled folding/unfolding mechanism..
layer (PFDTCS, Sigma Aldrich, USA) was added by vapor
deposition to prevent hydrogel adhesion on this side of the
chamber.
After placing the mask on the spacer substrate, a ﬁrst
hydrogel solution, based on PEGDA (3 wt% DMPA photo
initiator, 50 wt% ethyl lactate solvent. All materials were
purchased from Sigma Aldrich, USA) was inﬁltrated into the
photo polymerization cell (deﬁned thickness, 10 mm) and
polymerized at 365 nm for 2 minutes (Karl Sss Microtec,
300 W mercury lamp, Germany). After separating the two
substrates, the polymerized hydrogel features remained on
the glass mask.
The NIR light responsive hydrogel layer was composed
of NIPAAM, acrylamide and PEGDA as a crosslinker
(NIPAAM-AAm-PEGDA molar ratio 85/15/0.5, 3 wt%
DMPA photo initiator, 70 wt% ethyl lactate, all materials
purchased from Sigma Aldrich, USA). A 3 wt% graphene
oxide, produced by controlled oxidation from graphite was
added and dispersed into the hydrogel solution by ultra-
sonication (4000 J, probe sonicator, SONICS, USA). The
solution was introduced into the space between the photo
mask and another substrate, after removing the previously
unpolymerized solution. A thicker spacer (40 mm) was used
in this case, and the polymerization was carried out for
an additional three minutes. Afterwards, the samples were
released by simple immersion in water and rinsed deeply to
remove the unreacted materials.
B. Fabrication of Alginate Microbeads
Magnetic microbeads were formed by nebulization from
a mixture of alginate (LF10/60, LF20/40, Sigma Aldrich),
iron oxide and phosphate buffer saline (PBS) into a bath of
calcium chloride. The alginate was ﬁrst dissolved into deion-
izied water, and after various sterilization and liophilization
treatments, dissolved again in PBS (2.5 wt% using a ratio of
4:1 LF10/60: LF20/40) ad mixed with 100 mg/ml iron(III)
oxide powder (< 5mm diameter, Sigma Aldrich). The mix-
ture was then nebulized over a 100 mM calcium chloride
bath (ﬂow at 3.13 ml/min, volumetric ﬂow rate of 30 cubic
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
Fig. 3. Fabrication method of the hydrogel bilayers. A) The non-responsive
layer (green) is polymerized upon UV exposure on the photomask, due to
the selective coating of adhesive (purple) and non-adhesive layers (red). B)
In the second step, the thermoresponsive layer (blue) is polymerized on the
bottom of the ﬁrst layer using a thicker spacer substrate (yellow). c) The
two layers are then released by immersion in water and curl due to the
stress distribution. Final structures resemble the shape of a spheroid or the
Venus ﬂytrap. Scale bar is 200 mm.
feet per minute) and crosslinked as spheres in the cationic
bath, thus forming magnetic microbeads (diameters in the
range of 10-100 mm). The so formed magnetic beads were
rinsed extensively in deionized water and stored until use.
C. Experimental Setup
The system consists of eight stationary electromagnets
with soft magnetic cores and is capable of producing mag-
netic ﬁelds and gradients up to 50 mT and 0.5 T/m at
frequencies up to 100 Hz. For visual tracking, a Leica M80
microscope at 6.0 X magniﬁcation observes the workspace
from above. We mounted a NIR laser (wavelength 785 nm,
1.5 W power, laser spot 5 mm, SLOC lasers, China) in a
conﬁguration that allows us to focus the laser beam directly
onto the sample and effectively stimulate the light responsive
bilayers.
D. Laser Excitation
The photothermal actuation of the hydrogel nanocompos-
ites and the bilayers was tested using a focused NIR laser
(wavelength 785 nm, 1.5 W power, laser spot 5 mm, SLOC
lasers, China). Heating of the samples related to time of
irradiation was monitored by means of a thermal camera
3778
25 30 35 40 45 50 55
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
Temperature [°C]
Swelling ratio 
 
 
PEGDA
Thermosensitive layer (no graphene oxide)
Thermosensitive layer (graphene oxide)
Fig. 4. Temperature dependent swelling ratio analysis of the individual
hydrogel layers
(Flir, USA). An estimation of the average exposition time,
and power was in this way established.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The light responsive hydrogel bilayers are created to
protect the payload from adverse effects (i.e. foreign body
reactions) while providing a remotely controlled actuation for
delivery. Alginate magnetic microbeads can be loaded with
cells and drugs and at the same time provide the way to mag-
netically manipulate the full devices.The fabrication method
consists of an easy and reliable double step process which
is compatible with a huge variety of materials, allowing
further combinations and solutions for the hydrogel bilayer
production. We designed structures that could ensure a closed
compartment where the beads could be accommodated in
different conﬁgurations. The spheroid was created from a
symmetrical 8 arms 2D star, while the Venus ﬂytrap is the
result of an elongated version of the previous design (see
Figure 3d).
The ﬁnal curvature (1=r where r is the radius of cur-
vature) of the devices can be modeled using from the
Timoshenko formula for the bending of bilayers (equation
1):
1
r
=
6(e
2
 e
1
)(1+m)
2
h(3(1+m)
2
+(1+mn)(m
2
+
1
mn
))
(1)
Where n=E
1
=E
2
, m=a
1
=a
2
, E
x
is the elasticity modulus,
a
x
is the thickness of the layer, h is the total thickness, and
e
x
is the strain of the ﬁlm. The radius of curvature is mainly
controlled by the difference in the strains of the ﬁlms, which
is related to the swelling ratios and their thickness. This
dependence allowed us to control the ﬁnal shape during the
synthesis of the materials and the photolithography process.
A. Characterization of Swelling ratio and Transition Tem-
perature
The functional characterization of the swelling ratio and
transition temperature of the used hydrogels was determined
Fig. 5. Temperature response of self-folding soft microrobots.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Time [sec]
Temperature [°C]
 
 
exp.1
exp.2
exp.3
Fig. 6. NIR light sensitivity of the actuating layer. Three different samples
were stimulated for two cycles till 60

C to prove the repeatability of the
mechanism.
gravimetrically by using gel discs (diameter 4.5 mm, thick-
ness 2 mm) produced by UV polymerization. The gels were
allowed to swell at different temperatures (from 25

C to
55

C), in water bath (Julabo, Germany) and their equilibrium
swelling ratio calculated at each temperature (Equation 2):
ESR=
M
s
 M
d
M
d
(2)
where M
s
and M
d
are the mass of the swollen hydrogel
and the dried mass, respectively. They were measured using
a precise weighing scale. The effect of graphene oxide on the
swelling properties was investigated by means of the same
method. The thermoresponsive nanocomposite (active layer)
was synthesized starting from NIPAAm, a polymer naturally
collapsing over its lower critical solution temperature (LCST,
32

C). By polymerizing it together with a hydrophilic co-
monomer like AAm, and a low concentration of crosslinker
(PEGDA), we were able to increase the temperature of
transition to a value of 40

C (see Figure 4), and at the
same time provide a high swelling capability to the actuating
layer. The inclusion of graphene oxide, though modifying
signiﬁcantly this parameter, did not inﬂuence the temperature
of transition. Although tested with larger structures, the
absolute values of swelling constitute an intrinsic property
of the material and does not change with the size. Smaller
sizes allow faster diffusion and therefore faster actuation of
the devices.
3779
(a) The beads were randomly distributed over open structures
at high temperatures. The successive cooling and folding of
the devices resulted in the ﬁnal platform
(b) Final platform
Fig. 7. Loading mechanism of microbeads into hydrogel bilayers
A visual analysis of the folding/unfolding of the hydrogel
bilayers was conducted by means of a USB digital microcam-
era (Dnt Gmbh, Germay), using a custom made temperature
controlled microchamber. The structures maintained a closed
conﬁguration till a value of 38-39

C (see Figure 5), thus
potentially allowing navigation without loss of materials in
a physiological human body environment.
NIR laser light sensitivity, provided by the inclusion of
graphene oxide was tested by direct short exposure to a laser
beam, focused at 785 nm (1.5 W power). As it can be seen
in Figure 6, a temperature higher than 50

C is reached in
the range of 10 seconds; the process appears repeatable even
for continuous cycles of irradiation.
B. Bead Loading, Magnetic Manipulation, IR Release
The magnetic alginate microparticles were loaded inside
the sealed compartments of the folded bilayers by mixing
the two components in water at temperature higher than
40

C. The subsequent cooling allowed the hydrogel bilayers
to close and entrapped the beads inside (Figure 7). Structures
mimicking the Venus ﬂytraps were able to create an ordered
distribution of the beads along their main axis, thus having
a more deﬁned magnetic axis, while star like structures
encapsulated the beads with no preferential order.
Magnetic manipulation of the ﬁnal platform was achieved
using a 5-DOF electromagnetic manipulation system, Oc-
tomag [9]. We demonstrated real-time, closed-loop servoing
of individual magnetic alginate beads by implementing a pro-
portional controller. The visual tracker was able to recognize
the microrobot (see blue frame in Figure 8); the controller
applied the required magnetic gradients to move the bead
along the pre-planned circular trajectory (red circles in Figure
8 indicate the target waypoints). A short exposure to NIR
excitation caused a rapid unfolding of the bilayer. Magnetic
stimulation was then used to move the beads out of their
conﬁned spaces (Figure 9).
C. Drug Delivery Tests
Delivery studies of brilliant green (BG), a dye used as
a drug model, embedded into the nanocomposites, were
performed to investigate the effect of laser exposure on the
kinetics of drug release. Hydrogel disks similar as the ones
used for the material characterization, were immersed into
a 1 mM brilliant green (BG, Sigma Aldrich) solution in
PBS. After 24 hours, they were rinsed brieﬂy with water
and divided in two classes. The ﬁrst set of samples was
allowed to release the dye in PBS (1 ml volume, exchanged
at deﬁned time intervals, to mimic the perfect sink condition),
and the drug proﬁle was deﬁned by measurements of UV/VIS
spectroscopy (Inﬁnite M200 Pro, Tecan Ag, Switzerland) at
624 nm wavelength.
Similarly a set of three samples was exposed for the
ﬁrst hour of release to ON-OFF cycles (irradiation time=10
minutes, rest cycle=10 minutes) of NIR laser. One sample
was continuously exposed for the ﬁrst hour. Their drug
release was evaluated in the same way as the control group.
A similar experiment was conducted on hydrogel bilayers,
to analyze the effect of the change of conformation (from
closed tubule to open square) on the drug release proﬁle.
The typical diffusion driven kinetics, following the
Peppas-Korsmeyer model (equation 3, where M(t) is the
mass released at time t, and M
¥
is total mass) was slightly
modiﬁed by an ON-OFF laser exposure performed for the
ﬁrst hour of experiments. As it can be seen in Figure 10, the
laser induced collapse of the matrix decreases the amount
of drug release by the hydrogels, due to shrinkage in pore
sizes. The effect is even more visible when the layers are
continuously exposed to the beam, without allowing any
swelling in the meanwhile.
M(t)
M
¥
=at
n
(3)
This remote control of the drug release is expected to
have reversed effects when a change of shape (from folded
to unfolded structure) is involved in the diffusion driven
process. By laser driven unfolding of polymer bilayers, the
area exposed to the solvent is expected to augment (from
a closed to an open conﬁguration), and therefore to induce
an increase in the drug release. A detailed investigation is
currently going on to test this hypothesis.
D. Cytotoxicity and Cell Encapsulation
To explore the potential of the platform, we have also
tested the biocompatibility of the protecting hydrogel bi-
layers and successfully encapsulated live cells inside algi-
nate microbeads. Hydrogel bilayers were rinsed and washed
thoroughly in DI water until non signal from unreacted
materials was detected by UV/VIS spectrophotometry. They
were subsequently sterilized in ethanol and UV light and
submerged in culture medium in a 6-well plate. After 24
hours of incubation, the gel conditioned medium was trans-
ferred to the cells (3T3 ﬁbroblasts), in well plates. After an
3780
Fig. 8. Automated magnetic manipulation over a selected pattern. Real time optical tracking was used to maneuver the microrobots along planned
trajectory. Red circles denote target destinations and the circles turn into blue as the robot passes over them. Scale bar is 500 mm.
Fig. 9. Laser induced release of the beads from the hydrogel bilayers. A
short exposure causes the unfolding of the bilayer. Magnetic stimulation is
then used to move the beads out of their conﬁned spaces. Scale bar is 500
mm.
incubation of 48 hours, WST-1 reagent (Roche) was added to
each well. Three hours later, the solutions were analyzed at
435 nm to calculate the relative intensity of the absorbance
compared to a control (no gel conditioned medium). Ten
parallel experiments were conducted to evaluate the effect
of the gels on cell proliferation. We did not observe any
detectable change in cellular activity or a sign of toxic effect.
Cell encapsulation inside the magnetic alginate mi-
crobeads was performed during microbead fabrication. D1
mouse mesenchymal stem cells were rinsed three times
and the culture medium was replaced with a 2.5% wt 4:1
LF10/60:LF 20/40 alginate, 100 mg/ml iron (II, III) oxide
solution in PBS again through centrifugal washing. The
mixture was nebulized over a calcium chloride bath and the
formed beads rinsed three times in PBS and transferred in
cultured medium. At one, three, seven days, LIVE/DEAD
cell viability essays (Invitrogen, USA) were performed to
assess the viability of D1 cells per microbead. Mesenchymal
stem cells, encapsulated during the fabrication, were able to
resist to the environment and proliferate in the subsequent
week, without any negative effect of the surrounding hydro-
gel bilayers (see Figure 11) .
E. Discussion
In this work, we presented the ﬁrst prototype of a soft
microrobotic platform to explore the potential of the system,
and set milestones for further improvements. We fabricated
our microgrippers with sizes slightly less than 500 mm using
inexpensive materials such as foil masks, and microfabricated
polymeric spacers. Using the same fabrication method with
high-resolution chromium masks and metal spacers, scaling
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
x 10
?6
Time [minutes]
Drug release [grams]
 
 
Control
ON?OFF laser exposure (10 minutes ON, 10 minutes OFF)
Continuous laser exposure (1 hour)
Fig. 10. Drug release studies performed on BG loaded active layers. The
laser reduces the size of the samples inﬂuencing the pore size. The diffusion
driven drug release is therefore lowered by ON-OFF cycles of exposure. The
effect is even more visible when the samples are continuously exposed to
the laser source.
down the size of self-folding devices 10-folds is straight-
forward [11]. As a result, we can scale the whole system
(microgrippers along with trapped microbeads) down to 50
mm using already demonstrated fabrication techniques. They
would be small enough to be navigated inside the arteries as
demonstrated in [6].
Although reported as a preliminary study the photothermal
actuation and its inﬂuence on drug release constitutes a novel
investigation of the capabilities of the material. The idea of
combining cell laden alginate magnetic microbeads inside
a self-folding, protecting shell through self-assembly opens
up new avenues of combining different functionalities in a
single device.
A recent report showed that fully degradable polymer
bilayers can be fabricated [12]. Our fabrication strategy is
fully compatible with these biodegradable materials. The
properties of PNIPAAm layers can be adjusted to introduce
antifouling against cell and ECM protein adhesion [13]. Ad-
ditional features can be introduced by studying the physical
design of the device.
3781
time [days]
number of cells 
per microbead
Cell Viability /%)
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
0       1        2       3       4        5        6       7
0
1
2
3
4
5
day 1 day 3
day 7
a) b)
Fig. 11. Viability tests on stem cells encapsulated inside the magnetic
alginate microbeads. A) The viability improves after the rough fabrication
process, due to proliferation of the surviving cells. B) Fluorescence micro-
graphs of live (green) versus dead (red) encapsulated cells. Scale bars are
200 and 500 mm respectively.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
Despite being developed as a prototype, the proposed
microrobotic platform possesses most of the required features
for minimally invasive therapies including 3D automated
magnetic steering, the capacity to load and release drugs
and biological entities, and remote control of the actuation.
Moreover, the fabrication method is versatile and compatible
with the production of even small devices, with different
tailored materials. Visual tracking could be substituted by
magnetic or NIR based strategies, allowing the use of these
devices for in vivo applications.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Financial support by the European Research Council Ad-
vanced Grant Microrobotics and Nanomedicine (BOTMED),
by the ERC grant agreement n. 247283, and by the Swiss
National Science Foundation are gratefully acknowledged.
Additionally, this work was supported by the National Insti-
tutes of Health (R01 DE0013349). The authors are thankful
to Prof. Dr. Christopher Hierold, and Prof. Dr. S. Pratsinis for
their contribution and comments and to Dr. Simone Schurle
for her help with magnetic manipulation experiments. The
authors would also like to acknowledge Fabian Starsich and
Rocco Bottani for their help during the work.
REFERENCES
[1] B. J. Nelson, I. K. Kaliakatsos, and J. J. Abbott, “Microrobots for min-
imally invasive medicine,” Annual Review of Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 12, pp. 55–85, 2010.
[2] A. Moglia, A. Menciassi, M. O. Schurr, and P. Dario, “Wireless
capsule endoscopy: from diagnostic devices to multipurpose robotic
systems,” Biomedical Microdevices, vol. 9, pp. 235–243, 2007.
[3] S. Yim and M. Sitti, “3-d localization method for a magnetically actu-
ated soft capsule endoscope and its applications,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 2013.
[4] F. Ullrich, C. Bergeles, J. Pokki, O. Ergeneman, S. Erni, G. Chatzipir-
piridis, S. Pane, C. Framme, and B. J. Nelson, “Mobility experiments
with microrobots for minimally invasive intraocular surgery,” Inves-
tigative Ophtalmology and Visual Science, vol. 54, pp. 2853–2863,
2013.
[5] E. Gultepe, J. S. Randhawa, S. Kadam, S. Yamanaka, F. M. Selaru,
E. J. Shin, A. N. Kalloo, and D. H. Gracias, “Biopsy with thermally-
responsive untethered microtools,” Advanced Materials, vol. 25, pp.
514–519, 2013.
[6] P. Pouponneau, J. C. Leroux, G. Soulez, L. Gaboury, and S. Martel,
“Co-encapsulation of magnetic nanoparticles and doxorubicin into
biodegradable microcarriers for deep tissue targeting by vascular mri
navigation,” Biomaterials, vol. 32, pp. 3481–3486, 2011.
[7] S. Pedron, S. van Lierop, P. Horstman, R. Penterman, D. J. Broer,
and E. Peeters, “Stimuli responsive delivery vehicles fro cardiac
microtissue transplantation,” Advanced Functional Materials, vol. 21,
pp. 1624–1630, 2011.
[8] T. S. Shim, S.-H. Kim, C.-J. Heo, H. C. Jeon, and S.-M. Yang, “Con-
trolled origami folding of hydrogel bilayers with sustained reversibility
for robust microcarriers,” Angewandte Chemie, vol. 124, pp. 1449–
1452, 2012.
[9] M. P. Kummer, J. J. Abbott, B. E. Kratochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul,
and B. J. Nelson, “Octomag: An electromagnetic system for 5-dof
wireless micromanipulation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26,
no. 6, pp. 1606–1617, 2010.
[10] C. Peters, S. Fusco, Y . Li, S. Kuhne, B. J. Nelson, and C. Hi-
erold, “Backside liquid phase photolithography for fabricating self-
organizing hydrogel bilayers,” in 26th European Conference on Solid-
State Transducers, vol. 47, 2012, pp. 1219–1222.
[11] J.-H. Cho, M. D. Keung, N. verellen, L. Lagae, V . V . Moshchalkov,
P. V . Dorpe, and D. Gracias, “Nanoscale origami for 3d optics,” Small,
vol. 7, pp. 1943–1948, 2011.
[12] S. Zakharchenko, E. Sperling, and L. Ionov, “Fully biodegradable self-
rolled polymer tubes: a candidate for tissue engineering scaffolds,”
Biomacromolecules, vol. 12, pp. 2211–2215, 2011.
[13] M. E. Nash, W. M. Carroll, P. J. Foley, G. Maguire, C. O’Connell,
A. V . Gorelov, S. Beloshapkin, and Y . A. Rochev, “Ultra-thin spin
coated crosslinkable hydrogels for use in cell sheet recovery-synthesis,
characterization to application,” Soft Matter, vol. 8, pp. 3889–3899,
2012.
3782
