Development of Intelligent Automatic Door System
Daiki Nishida
1
, Kumiko Tsuzura
1
, Shunsuke Kudoh
1
, Kazuo Takai
2
, Tatsuhiro Momodori
2
Norihiro Asada
2
, Toshihiro Mori
2
, Takashi Suehiro
1
and Tetsuo Tomizawa
1
Abstract—Conventional automatic doors cannot distinguish
between people wishing to pass through the door and people
passing by the door, so they often open unnecessarily. This
paper describes an intelligent door system that observes people
near a door so that the door opens at the proper time and
only for people who have the intention of passing through it.
To achieve this, we developed a novel laser range scanner that
scans the surrounding environment three dimensionally, and
formulated lightweight algorithms for the sensor. The experi-
mentalresultsshowthatthesensorcancontroladooraccording
to the speed of people within the required speciﬁcations and
that it correctly identiﬁes people passing by the door.
I. INTRODUCTION
Automatic doors are used throughout every city in the
world. A conventional automatic door has a proximity sensor
installed on the top of the door that detects surrounding
objects. No special operation by a user is required to enter
an automatic door because it opens automatically when a
person enters the sensing area.
The downside to this system is that even if a person
just passes by a door and has no intention of entering it,
the door will open unnecessarily. This occurrence wastes
energy not only in terms of the energy directly used for
opening/closing the door but also from other sources, such as
the air-conditioning facilities. To remedy this problem, when
an automatic door is installed at a place where lots of people
pass by it, the following solutions are typically applied:
 decrease the sensitivity of the proximity sensor,
 narrow the sensing area of the proximity sensor, and
 install a touch sensor instead of a proximity sensor.
However, these solutions have major shortcomings: they
hinder the ﬂow of people, causing people to slow down or
stop in front of the door, and touch sensors are not easy to
use for handicapped persons or those carrying bags.
This paper describes an intelligent door sensor that ob-
serves people near a door so that the door opens at the
proper time and only for people who have the intention of
passing through it. In this study, we develop both hardware
and software for an intelligent automatic door. With regard
to hardware, we developed a novel laser range scanner that
observes the surrounding environment three dimensionally
from the top of the door. With regard to software, we
1
D. Nishida et al. are with the Department of Human Media Sys-
tems at Graduate School of Information Systems, The University of
Electro-Communications, Choufu, Tokyo, Japan fnishida, kudoh,
suehiro, tomysg@taka.is.uec.ac.jp
2
K. Takai et al. are with the Department of Engineering Hokuyo
Automatic Co., Ltd., Osaka, Japan fk-takai, t-momodori,
n-asada, t-morig@hokuyo-aut.jp
Fig. 1. Target Environment
developed lightweight algorithms for the sensor that are
executable by microcomputers in the door sensor systems.
The basis of this work is as follows:
 the door is opened only for people who intend to use
it,
 the speed, width, and timing of door opening is deter-
mined based on observations of the positions, speed,
and number of people who are walking.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
discussesapplicablesensorsandalgorithmsfortheintelligent
automatic door, reviewing related work. Sections III and
IV give detailed descriptions of the proposed sensor and
algorithms, respectively. Section V shows the experimental
results of the proposed system and evaluates its advantages.
Section VI concludes this paper and describes the direction
of future studies.
II. INTELLIGENT AUTOMATIC DOOR SYSTEM
A. Target Environment
Automatic doors are installed not only inside but also
as entrances and exits to buildings, meaning the lighting
conditions will vary throughout the day. In addition, doors
to the outside are exposed to changes in temperature along
with the change in seasons and are affected by the weather,
such as wind, rain, and snow. In addition, many doors are
located where crowds of people walk past them (Fig. 1).
B. Required Sensor Speciﬁcations
The sensor and the algorithms for the intelligent automatic
door proposed in this study should function correctly in
the environment described above, as well as meeting the
requirements given in Section I. Generally speaking, the
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6368
speed of human walking is 600-1600 mm/s. According to
a security guideline provided by the Japan Automatic Door
Association (JADA), with regard to automatic double doors,
it is recommended that the speed of opening should be
1,000 mm/s or less and that the width of opening should
be 800 mm or more. Taking these conditions into account, a
door needs to begin opening before a person reaches a point
1,300 mm from the door, and therefore the sensor needs to
cover at least a 1,800-mm radius from the door under the
assumption that the detection of walking speed takes 0.3 s.
In addition, a sensor for an intelligent automatic door needs
to work robustly under diverse environmental conditions. As
the illuminance of daylight is 32,000–100,000 lx, the sensor
needs to work under an illuminance of 0–100,000 lx for
24-hour operation. Even if the sensor gets wet in rainy or
snowy weather, or even if specular light shines directly into
the sensor, the sensor should be able to function with little
change in performance.
C. Related Work
Conventional automatic doors mainly use infrared or ul-
trasonic sensors, which can detect the existence of both static
andmovingobjects.Somehigh-endcommercialdoorsensors
that have multiple infrared sensors control their scanning
areas ﬂexibly and reduce unexpected opening for passing-by
people by dividing their scanning areas into multiple areas.
However, because the resolution is not very high (the size of
each divided area is 200 mm on a side at a minimum), the
sensors cannot detect the velocity of objects, but detect only
their presence. Therefore, to realize our intelligent automatic
door, we need to either adopt a sensor that has not hitherto
been used for automatic doors, or develop a novel sensor
appropriate for our purpose.
Most existing methods for detecting the position of ob-
jects, that have not been utilized for automatic doors to date,
use cameras and depth sensors as sensing devices.
Several types of cameras are used for detecting objects,
such as simple RGB cameras [1], infrared cameras that can
be used at night [2][3][4], stereo cameras that can measure
distance [5][6][7] and RGB-D camera can obtain depth data
and color image data [8][9]. However, in general, cameras
are not robust against changes in the illumination level, and
thus they are not suitable for use as outdoor sensors which
are expected to work in any weather condition.
Recently, methods that use depth sensors for measuring
the position and shape of objects have been studied. Among
the several types of depth sensor available, laser sensors
haveahighertolerancetoilluminationchanges,makingthem
suitableforoutdooruse.Inparticular,three-dimensionallaser
sensors are suitable for use in intelligent automatic door
systems because they are able to detect the positions of
objects when installed on top of doors. Thus, we use a
three-dimensional laser sensor in this study. Requirements
for a three-dimensional laser scanner used in our system are
as follows: it should be used in outdoor environments, it
should be small enough to be mounted on top of a door,
and it should not be too expensive to be included in a
Fig. 2. Overview of the developed door sensor
commercial system. Unfortunately, no conventional three-
dimensionalsensorsatisﬁesallofthem.Consequently,inthis
study, we developed a novel three-dimensional laser range
scanner speciﬁcally for use as a door sensor.
With regard to algorithms for detecting the position
and velocity of objects with laser range scanners, several
have been proposed [10][11][12] and [13]. Shibasaki et al.
tracked more than one person by using multiple laser scan-
ners [10][11], and Carballo et al. detect people using multi-
layered laser scanners [12]. Kurazume et al. tracked persons
by particle ﬁltering under the condition of occlusion [13].
However, because most existing studies assume that peo-
ple will be observed in the horizontal plane using two-
dimensional laser scanners, they cannot be applied directly
to our situation in which a three-dimensional sensor installed
on the top of a door scans people from above. In addition,
because they are expected to track people as accurately as
possible, the computation is too heavy to be implemented
in the microcomputers inside our automatic door sensors.
Therefore, we needed to develop an algorithm speciﬁcally
for use with our novel sensor to achieve the functions of our
intelligent automatic door.
III. DEVELOPED SENSOR HARDWARE
The proposed intelligent door sensor is a three-
dimensional laser range sensor that measures the distance to
points on the surface of objects by two-dimensional laser
scanning. An overview of the developed sensor and the
speciﬁcations are shown in Fig. 2 and Table I
Thesensorisinstalledonthetopofadoorframeandscans
objects obliquely downward. The detecting plane assumes
the shape as shown in Fig. 4, with the sensor ﬁtted at a
tilt angle of 20 deg. If the sensor is attached at a height
of 3.5 m, the effective sensing area is 5,000 mm wide and
3,000 mm deep. The sensor obtains vertical and horizontal
angularsignalsfromtworesonantmirrorsandthedistanceto
points on the surface of scanned objects, and then calculates
a three-dimensional point cloud of the scanned objects.
Measurement is based on a time-of-ﬂight (TOF) method,
in which the distance is calculated from the difference in
time between emitting a laser beam and receiving the re-
ﬂected beam. Typical ways of measuring the time difference
6369
z
x
y
door
sensor
scan points
Fig. 4. Set up of the intelligent automatic door sensor (Red dots are scan
points)
Fig. 5. Radial area by the door Fig. 6. Stripe area by the door
people. The coordinate system is constructed as follows: the
origin is located at the projected point of the sensor onto the
ground, and the x, y, and z-axes are taken to be the direction
perpendicular to the door, the direction parallel to the door,
and vertical, respectively(see Fig. 4). In the following, we
call the point where a beam hits an object the scan point
of the beam. The x and y-coordinate values are used in
the proposed algorithm. Although it is not mentioned in this
paper, applications that consider the height of objects would
be possible if the z-coordinate values were used.
B. Estimation of the approach speed Based on Radial Seg-
mentation
For estimating the position and velocity of people moving
to the door, we segmented the scanning area into radial cells
as shown in Fig. 5. For each cell, scan points of c-beams
are summarized and the position and velocity of a moving
personiscalculated.Inourimplementation,themeasurement
area is segmented into 30 radial cells by 6 degrees.
1) Grouping: The person closest to the door in a cell
alone is considered in our algorithm even if more people
exist there. The reason why this strategy works is as follows:
if a person intends to pass another person from behind, he
or she needs to move to a neighboring cell because a cell
is too narrow for a person to pass another person inside the
cell.
In order to pick up the closest person, a histogram is
createdasshowninFig.7.Thehorizontalaxisisthevalueof
x-coordinate of scan points (every 100mm), and the vertical
axisis the count of thepoints. Weregarda valley,continuous
bins in the histogram where no beam is observed, as a
boundary of objects. The scan points are grouped by the
boundaries and the group closest to the door is extracted.
Here the groups that include too few scan points are ignored
as noise.
2) Estimation of Position and Time of observation: The
mean of x-coordinate values of the scan points belonging
to the closest group extracted above is considered as the
position of the approaching person closest to the door. Also,
the mean of the time of them are calculated because one scan
takes 0.1 s, and the time varies among scan points depending
on the location of people and the direction of scanning. The
six latest estimations of the position and the time are always
kept for the use in the decision phase.
3) Estimation of Velocity: The velocity of an approaching
person is calculated by the least square method based on
the position and the time extracted in every radial cell.
Fig. 8 shows a graph plotting the position of the closest
approaching person against the time in a radial cell. Fitting
a line to the points in the graph by the least square method,
the velocity of the person is estimated as the slope of the
regression line. If the position changes largely from the
previous frame, or if no object has been detected for more
than two successive frames, the stored data are discarded and
the velocity estimation starts over again.
4) EstimationofNumberofPeople: Inthedecisionphase,
the width of opening the door is decided depending on
whether one person alone approaches the door or more
peopleapproach.Thus,thenumberofpeopleinthescanarea
is required to be estimated. First, the leftmost and rightmost
cells where approaching people exist are extracted and count
the number of the cells between them. Next, by comparing
the position of people in the leftmost and rightmost cells,
the cell where a person is closer to the door is selected
and the width of the cell at the position of the person is
calculated. Finally, the product of the number and the width
iscalculated,andifitexceedsacertainthreshold,itisjudged
that more than one person is approaching the door.
C. Estimation of the intention Based on Striped Segmenta-
tion
Although the method based on radial segmentation esti-
mates behavior of people approaching a door, it sometimes
mistakenly detects people just passing by in front of the
door. Thus, it is necessary to discriminate people who enter
the door from passing-by people. For this purpose, after
the position estimation in radial segmentation method, we
examine detected people and select out people who have
intention of entering the door. Only the selected people are
considered in the successive estimations.
In order to discriminate people approaching the door,
we segment the scan area into striped cells as shown in
Fig. 6 and estimate the walking direction of people. In
our implementation, the width of a striped cell is 100mm.
When a person is ﬁrst detected in the scan area, the cells
within a certain distance to the person are marked as pending
zone(Fig. 9). People who stay in pending zone are ignored in
6371
Fig. 7. Histogram of scan points in a radial cell
position of the closest 
approaching object [mm]
time[s]
1500
1850
1800
1750
1700
1650
1600
1550
0.05 0.10 0.30 0 0.25 0.20 0.15 0.35
fitting a line
position
Fig. 8. A transition in the position of the closest approaching a person
the estimation phase. Once a person gets out of the pending
zone, the algorithm judges the person is going to enter the
door and consider the person in the estimation phase. By
focusing only on people approaching the door, we can ignore
passing-by people effectively.
D. Decision of Opening Door
The proposed intelligent automatic door controls the tim-
ing, speed, and width of opening the door depending on a
situation.
1) Timing: The timing of opening the door is determined
based on the estimation of arrival time of people. As
described above, people approaching the door have been
extracted, so the arrival time of approaching people is
calculated by the position and the velocity of the people. The
command to open the door is issued in the timing that the
doorﬁnishesopeningjustintimeforthearrivaloftheperson
to the door. In addition, this door is designed to open even
if a person have stopped at the front of the door suddenly.
In this implementation, s-beams are used. When the number
of s-beams exceeds a threshold, the instruction to open the
door will be issued immediately.
2) Speed: There are two types of speed of opening the
door: normal and high speed. Usually, the door opens at
normal speed in order to reduce the wear of the drive unit.
However, if the estimated time period for arrival is shorter
than the time required for opening the door at normal speed,
for example in the case a person suddenly changes the
direction of walk, the door opens at high speed.
3) Width: Thewidthofopeningthedoorisdeterminedby
the estimation of the number of people. When one person
alone enters the door, the width is half-open. When more
than one, it is full-open.
A person getting 
out of the pending 
zone is considered 
to enter the door. 
A person who stay in the 
pending zone is ignored
in the estimation.
Pending zone
Fig. 9. Pending zone
sensor
door
walker
Fig. 10. Experimental environment
V. EXPERIMENT
In order to evaluate the proposed sensor, developed sensor
was installed to an experimental doorway, and the following
three experiments were conducted. Fig. 10 shows the experi-
mental setup. The parameters of the door and the door sensor
are set as shown in Table III.
A. Timing of Opening Door
In this experiment, one subject entered the door from
severaldirections.Foreverytrial,thepositionandvelocityof
the subject was recorded at the time the command to open
the door was issued. The entering directions were 0 deg,
22.5 deg, and 45 deg to the x-axis (Fig. 11), and the subject
entered the door 30 times for each direction. Additionally, to
obtain the true position and velocity of the subject, we set
a two-dimensional laser scanner (UTM-30LX) behind the
subject and recorded the subject’s position at 10Hz. We use
the position and velocity calculated from these data as true
values.
The result is shown in Fig. 12. The horizontal and vertical
axes are the position and the velocity of the subject when
the door began to open, respectively. The dotted line shows
6372
