  
For temporal decoding, we identified polychronous 
groups by the following criteria: 1) The group started with an 
anchor neuron, that is, an input neuron spike. 2) A group 
member had to be connected to that anchor neuron and fire a 
spike within 4 ms of its axonal delay. 3) From this set of 
neurons, a downstream neuron needed to receive at least two 
spikes from the upstream neuron within 4 ms of its axonal 
delay.  This algorithm proceeded as a breadth-first search 
until criterion 3 no longer could be met. A polychronous 
group was considered a left-predictor if P(L | pg) > 0.5 and a 
right-predicator if P(R | pg) > 0.5).  
III. RESULTS 
A. SNN Activity During Movements 
The SNN took input directly from the trackball array and 
responded to hand movements. Fig. 5 shows firing activity 
from a representative left to right hand sweep (Fig. 5, top) 
and spontaneous activity with no input (Fig. 5, bottom). In 
the top chart of Fig. 5, the trackballs of the fourth column are 
contacted with a hand at 20 ms and then the third, second and 
first columns are contacted at 240 ms, 460 ms, and 670 ms, 
respectively. The duration of touching a column is roughly 
600 ms. The hand contacts the fourth column at 20 ms and 
leaves it at 660 ms. We recorded 200 left moves and 200 
right moves for training and testing spiking neural networks. 
The interval between two message events from the trackball 
array in our recording ranged from 5 ms to 20 ms, which 
could generate firing rates from 12.5Hz to 50Hz. The average 
number of message events for a left move was 443.7 with a 
standard deviation 80.9 ms, while the average number of 
message events for a right move was 340.2 ms with a 
standard deviation 54.8 ms. The lower raster diagram shows 
spontaneous activity of a SNN when there is no stimulus 
from the trackballs. The spikes are results of background 
noise and input noise (i.e., I
input_noise
 and I
background_noise
). 
The simulated somatosensory cortex showed repeatable 
patterns of firing in response to left and right hand 
movements. Fig. 6 shows the correlation of firing activity 
between 8 right (rows and columns 1-8) and 8 left (rows and 
columns 9-16) movements before training (Fig. 6, left) and 
after training (Fig. 6, right). Note that after training through 
unsupervised STDP, similar classes of movements are highly 
correlated, whereas different classes are not. 
B. Rate versus Temporal Coding of Movements 
We used Receiver Operator Characteristic (ROC) curves 
to evaluate the performance of rate decoding and 
polychronous group decoding. Fig. 7 shows the ROC curves 
for rate decoding left and right movements using left and 
right responsive neurons and for temporal decoding using left 
and right polychronous groups. For the rate code, we varied 
the firing rate threshold from 0.0Hz to 6.0Hz by steps of 
0.1Hz. For the temporal code we varied the number of 
repeating polychronous groups threshold from 0 to 100 by 
steps of 2. Over five different simulations, the average 
number of polychronous groups was 382±75sd, and the 
reoccurrence of a polychronous group across all trials ranged 
from 5% to 38% with a median value of 10%. 
Both firing rate and polychronous group decoding were 
Figure 6. Correlation of firing activity between movements. Rows and 
columns 1-8 are left movements. Rows and columns 9-16 are right 
movements. Left) SNN before training. Right) SNN after training. 
Figure 7. ROC curves for rate decoding (top) and polychronous group 
decoding (bottom). 
Figure 5. Top) Response of neurons to a left movement. Each dot 
represents a spike from a neuron. Rows 0-799 are excitatory and rows 
800-935 are inhibitory. Red dots represent the 256 input neurons. 
Bottom) Same network in the absence of a movement. 
1912
