Automated Real-Time Control
of Fluidic Self-Assembly of Microparticles
Massimo Mastrangeli
1;2
, Felix Schill
1
, Jonas Goldowsky
3
,
Helmut Knapp
3
, Juergen Brugger
2
and Alcherio Martinoli
1
Abstract— Self-assembly is a key coordination mechanism for
large multi-unit systems and a powerful bottom-up technol-
ogy for micro/nanofabrication. Controlled self-assembly and
dynamic reconﬁguration of large ensembles of microscopic
particles can effectively bridge these domains to build in-
novative systems. In this perspective, we present SelfSys, a
novel platform for the automated control of the ﬂuidic self-
assembly of microparticles. SelfSys centers around a water-
ﬁlled microﬂuidic chamber whose agitation modes, induced by
a coupled ultrasonic actuator, drive the assembly. Microparticle
dynamics is imaged, tracked and analyzed in real-time by an
integrated software framework, which in turn algorithmically
controls the agitation modes of the microchamber. The closed
control loop is fully automated and can direct the stochastic
assembly of microparticle clusters of preset dimension. Control
issues speciﬁc to SelfSys implementation are discussed, and its
potential applications presented. The SelfSys platform embodies
at microscale the automated self-assembly control paradigm we
ﬁrst demonstrated in an earlier platform.
I. INTRODUCTION
Self-assembly (SA) is an autonomous process whereby
ordered structures are formed out of the coordinated spatial
organization of their components [1]. In SA information to
build structures is mostly intrinsic, distributedly encoded in
the properties of the agents and in their local interactions
with other agents and with the environment. SA is a form of
chemistry, and it can be effectively described and modeled
using chemical analogies and formalisms [2], [3], [4]. Given
proper boundary conditions, it can produce structures and
patterns at all physical scales [1]. SA plays a fundamental
role in advanced technology, as well. Particularly, in micro-
and nanotechnology it enables the fabrication [5], [6] and
packaging [7], [8] of hybrid multifunctional systems in novel,
massively parallel and scalable ways. At scales dominated by
surface forces and Brownian motion, SA can represent the
only way to achieve controlled deposition [9] and organiza-
tion [10] of nanoparticles. At macroscopic scales, SA is a
scalable coordination mechanism for distributed systems of
robotic agents. In these systems, redundant local information
and interactions enable robots with limited resources to
*This work was funded by the SelfSys project within the framework of
the Nano-Tera.ch research initiative.
1
Distributed Intelligent Systems and Algorithms Laboratory (DISAL),
School of Architecture, Civil and Environmental Engineering,
´
Ecole Poly-
technique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland
2
Microsystems Laboratory (LMIS1), Institute of Microengineering,
School of Engineering,
´
Ecole Polytechnique F´ ed´ erale de Lausanne (EPFL),
Lausanne, Switzerland
3
Swiss Center for Electronics and Microtechnology (CSEM), Alpnach,
Switzerland
mastrangelim@gmail.com
perform non-trivial collective tasks robustly and without
centralized supervision [11].
Active agents such as robotic or M/NEMS modules are
extensions of passive agents such as particles. Beside having
internal states, active agents can program their interactions,
i.e. take decisions about them, as opposed to only and
necessarily yielding to hard-coded physical interactions, as
for instance atoms do. On the other hand, robotic minimalism
aims at achieving the same type of performance of distributed
robotic systems through lesser sophisticated agents. The
scavenging of propulsion from the environment, the mini-
mization of internal logic states and their embodiment into
mechanically switchable states [12] are primary instances of
this trend. Adopting SA as collective organization mecha-
nism, these tendencies posit a convergence between robotics
and micro/nanotechnology toward an extended conception of
self-assembling systems across physical scales [2]. Within
this perspective we aim to show that, through speciﬁc em-
bodiments, a single control approach can direct the SA of
passive interactive agents both at macro- and microscales.
In a previous work [3] we presented a centimetric platform
(Lily) for the controlled SA of water-ﬂoating, magnetically-
latching modules. The formation of target structures out of
non-autonomous passive modules was modeled and bang-
bang controlled automatically and in real-time by the M
3
framework [3]. The work evidenced how the interplay of as-
sembly and disassembly in distributed systems of reversibly-
bonding agents is functional to efﬁcient SA. Conversely,
in microscopic assembling systems the control of position
and motion of microagents is normally open-loop and not
automated. For instance, Tolley described the directed ﬂuidic
assembly of micromachined, mechanically-locking tiles into
irreversible multimeric structures [13]. Donald demonstrated
the use of a single global control signal to drive microassem-
bly of stress-engineered MEMS robots [14]. A magneto-
ﬂuidic apparatus for the directed reconﬁguration of sets of
millimetric, water-ﬂoating magnetic modules was developed
by Miyashita [15]. By externally switching the magnetic
moment of the modules, akin to an internal module state,
the ensuing perturbation of the magnetic ﬁeld prompted a
predictable system rearrangement.
Here we present SelfSys, a novel platform for controlled
ﬂuidic SA of microparticles (Fig. 1). SelfSys is built around
a water-ﬁlled microﬂuidic chamber whereby SA is driven by
competitive agitation modes induced by a coupled ultrasonic
actuator (Sect. II-A). Three-dimensional polymeric micropar-
ticles (Sect. II-B) scavenge their motion from the acousto-
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5860
Fig. 1: The automated, closed control loop of the SelfSys platform.
(a) Microﬂuidic chamber (b) Acousto-ﬂuidic ﬁeld
Fig. 2: (a) The SelfSys microchamber, evidencing the air
sockets, the access channels and the load (yellow arrow) and
unload (blue) ﬂow conﬁgurations. (b) CFD simulation of the
acousto-ﬂuidic ﬂow ﬁeld.
ﬂuidic ﬂow ﬁeld of the microchamber. Their dynamics is im-
aged, tracked and analyzed in real-time by an integrated soft-
ware framework (Sect. II-C) which in turn algorithmically
switches the agitation modes in the microchamber through
the actuator (Sect. II-D). The closed control loop in SelfSys
is fully automated, and can direct the stochastic assembly of
microparticle clusters of preset dimension (Sect. III).
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Acousto-Fluidic Microchamber
SelfSys centers on a water-ﬁlled microﬂuidic chamber
hosting the microparticles SA [16] (Fig. 2a). The 1 cm-
long, centro-symmetric chamber is molded in a 400m-thick
layer of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) sealed between two
glass slides (Fig. 1a). A motorized pump controls the water
ﬂow through three access microchannels, used to respectively
input, output and store the microparticles. The ﬂow conﬁg-
uration is set by the state of pneumatic PDMS valves [17]
that can be switched to open or close the microchannels.
Flow through the lateral (output) microchannel allow the
loading (unloading) of the microparticles in (from) the cham-
ber. The bottom side of the microchamber—which has an
acoustic resonance frequency of 40 kHz—is in contact with
an ultrasonic piezoelectric actuator with nominal resonance
frequency of 60 KHz. A symmetrical array of 20 air-ﬁlled,
500m-long sockets is patterned along the PDMS sidewalls.
The cross-section of the sockets (100 by 100 m) tunes the
resonance frequency of the embedded air bubbles to that
of the piezoelectric actuator. The acousto-ﬂuidic actuation
of the microchamber is mediated by secondary streaming
patterns. The patterns are produced by the oscillation of
the water/air interfaces. Thus the symmetrical arrangement
of the air bubbles generates a central, laminar ﬂow ﬁeld
(Fig. 2b) dragging the immersed microparticles. Efﬁcient
mixing is thus obtained in spite of the chamber’s low
Reynolds number (Re, ranging from 12 to 112 according
to actuation conditions).
By tuning the actuation frequency to the resonance of
either the bubbles or the chamber at maximum amplitude,
the assembly or disassembly mode of agitation can be
respectively incepted. The assembly mode promotes the
aggregation and coordination of the microparticles in the
center of the chamber. The disassembly mode induces
dispersion of the clusters in proximity of the sidewalls.
The duality between the microchamber modes is analogous
to that embodied in our aforementioned macroscopic Lily
platform [3]. Such duality is similarly exploited hereby—
i.e. at microscale—to implement a bang-bang control of the
stochastic dynamics of the system (Sect. II-D).
B. Polymeric Microparticles
We fabricated three-dimensional polymeric microparticles
as vehicles to investigate the dynamics of ﬂuidic SA in our
microchamber [18]. We aimed for microtiles, i.e. passive
agents reversibly assembling into planar ordered structures
of arbitrary dimension, yet simple enough to be easily batch
5861
(a) Microtile design
(b) Microtiles in water
Fig. 3: (a) 3D design of the microtiles for ﬂuidic SA. (b)
Microfabricated SU-8 microtiles in water.
fabricated and tracked during assembly. We referred to the
Lily modules for the proﬁle [3] (Fig. 3a), as it enables
the self-alignment of the tiles upon coordination into close-
packed square lattice. The Lily modules can preserve an
imposed vertical orientation while ﬂoating at the water/air
interface. However, this condition cannot be met in the
microchamber. In fact, though the microparticles stand at the
chamber’s bottom, they are immersed in bulk water and can
move along all spatial degrees of freedom
1
. Consequently,
the initial vertical orientation of the microparticles cannot be
imposed, nor is it likely to be preserved during the assembly
process. Given the microtile shape, this would result in the
formation of two subpopulations of microtiles with oppo-
site chirality. The subpopulations would not interact tightly
because of their unﬁtting geometry. To face this issue, we
designed the microtiles as the superposition of the chiral
copies of the original shape (Fig. 3a). Such 3D geometry
allows microtiles with either vertical orientation to tightly
pack into square lattice patterns.
The microtiles (Fig. 3b) were fabricated through the de-
position and patterning of two 50 m-thick layers of SU-8
using thick electroplated copper as sacriﬁcial layer [18]. The
SU-8 surfaces are coated with a ﬂuorinated silane-based self-
assembled monolayer to increase their hydrophobicity. When
in water, hydrophobic surfaces in close proximity interact by
short-ranged hydrophobic effects [19]. This interaction and
the inter-particle secondary radiation forces produced by the
ultrasonic ﬁeld can be overcome by ﬂuidic drag forces. Such
1
For fabrication and feeding reasons, the height of the microchamber
needs to be larger than the width of the microparticles [16].
interplay makes the assembly of the microtiles reversible.
Moreover, upon close packing the chosen geometry enhances
the hydrophobic interaction between the microtiles, since the
latter is proportional to the contact area and the microtiles
can adhere vertically in addiction to laterally. Finally, the
microtiles feature a central bichromatic marker—in the form
of a pair of steps—to ease their optical tracking, as described
in the next Section.
C. Particle Tracking
To track the dynamics of the microtiles, a computer vision
solution was implemented coping with the challenges posed
by our microﬂuidic environment. As the microchamber’s bot-
tom side is in direct contact with the piezoelectric actuator,
the vision system is limited to reﬂected-light microscopy. The
small depth of ﬁeld of microscope optics is comparable to the
size of the microtiles and the thickness of the microchamber.
Thus the microtiles appear blurred as they transiently move
out of the focal plane. Though the depth of ﬁeld can be
altered by optical means, the computer vision system needs
nonetheless to be robust to blur. The transparency of the
microtiles produces low optical contrast, especially when
using white omnidirectional lighting. Monochromatic green
and unidirectional lighting improved contrast and sharpness
as it avoided chromatic aberration and added shadowing
underneath the particles. Furthermore, the visibility of the
microtiles is mostly due to reﬂection and refraction of light
on their edges. This results in signiﬁcant changes of appear-
ance dependent on their spatial orientation; besides, lighting
conditions can signiﬁcantly vary when many particles cluster
together. Lastly, upon ultrasonic actuation the fast motion of
the microtiles (up to 26.6 and 250 mm=s in assembly and
disassembly mode, respectively) requires the vision system
to capture and process images at frame rates higher than
100 Hz. A high-speed GigE camera (Fastec HighSpec 1) with
a microscope lens assembly was mounted above the chamber
(Fig. 1b). The camera can capture thousands of frames per
second in an internal buffer; yet in real-time streaming mode
the capture rate is limited by the bandwidth of the Gigabit
Ethernet interface; i.e. for a reduced region of interest of
512 x 512 pixels to 150 frames per second. In summary,
our vision tracking system needed to be 1) robust to blur
and varying appearance and lighting of particles, 2) able to
track multiple objects simultaneously, and ideally 3) able to
process images at rates above 100 Hz.
Our particle tracking system is represented in Fig. 4. The
open source tracking software SwisTrack [20] was extended
with new modules for pattern-based particle tracking. An
approach based on the cross-correlation of a template pattern
against a captured image was chosen and implemented in the
Fourier domain. Thus after applying a 2D-FFT, the camera-
captured system image is multiplied with the 2D-FFT of
the pattern, i.e. a prepared image of a microtile. To ﬁne-
tune the system to varying blur and lighting conditions, a
bandpass ﬁlter is applied to the pattern in the Fourier domain
at initialisation. Bandpass ﬁltering and pattern matching can
therefore be done in a single point-wise multiplication, and
5862
input video
FFT
inv. FFT
Correlation ﬁlter pattern
bandpass
patterns
X
Probabilistic ﬁlter
FFT
graph clustering Piezo control
Fig. 4: Diagram of the particle tracking system. The gener-
ation of the ﬁlter pattern is run only once, thus it does not
contribute to the total processing time during operation.
allows to reduce global lighting variations (low frequencies)
as well as image noise and specular reﬂections (high frequen-
cies). After an inverse FFT, the resulting cross-correlation
amplitudes can be searched for maxima, which correspond
to the best matches of the input pattern. To improve the
tracking performance, a Bayesian ﬁlter is applied which com-
bines a Gaussian probability distribution of previous matches
with the current observation to obtain a new estimate. The
ﬁlter utilises elements from Monte-Carlo methods to track
multiple particles (randomised generation of hypotheses) and
histogram methods by representing hypotheses as gaussian-
blurred points in the image domain. This allows the use
of optimised, efﬁcient whole-image operations from the
OpenCV library. Steps of the algorithm are shown in Fig. 5.
The pattern matching and tracking algorithm was imple-
mented within SwisTrack using the OpenCV library. On an
Intel i7 CPU a frame processing rate of 45 Hz was achieved.
To further improve the speed, the FFT and multiplication
operations were ported to a GPU, using CUDA and OpenCV .
As the FFT and pointwise multiplication lend themselves to
parallel processing, signiﬁcant speed-up was possible. Run-
ning on a system with a GeForce Titan GPU, the processing
time of the whole pipeline per image was less than 5 ms—
fast enough to run the tracking system including image
capture at the maximum camera capture rate of 150 Hz.
The measured execution times for each module are shown
in the following table (the Pattern Tracker module combines
correlation, inverse FFT and ﬁltering):
Speed CPU/GPU 512x512 720x720
FFT 4.9 ms / 1.3 ms 12.2ms / 2.6 ms
Pattern tracker 8.1 ms / 2.9 ms 19.2 ms / 5.3 ms
Graph clustering 0.05 ms 0.05 ms
D. Control Algorithm
In this study, we aimed at directing the stochastic assembly
of clusters of microtiles with user-deﬁned size. The tracking
algorithm provides the instantaneous position of the particles
Algorithm 1 Tracking and control algorithm. I
t
: input
image, I
T
: pattern template of microtiles, F
bp
(f
c
;, gain):
2D bandpass ﬁlter, P
t
: set of points representing tracked
tiles. Parameters:: balance between previous prediction and
current matching step, s: radius of microtiles in pixels, :
matching threshold, : desired cluster size.
Require: T := FFT(I
T
- Blur(I
T
, r=15)) * F
bp
(f
c
;, gain)
for I
t
: do
^
I
t
:=FFT(I
t
)
^
M
t
:=
^
I
t
T
M
t
:=jFFT
 1
(
^
M
t
)j
R
t
:= Blur(f[p.x][p.y]:=1.0g for p in P
t 1
, r=15)
M
0
t
:=((1:0 )M
t
+)R
T
P
t
 P
t 1
+ 50 randomly distributed points
for p in P
t
do
p:= argmax(q in M
0
t
jjp qj<
s
2
)
if M
0
t
(p)< then
delete(p)
end if
end for
for p;q in P
t
jjp qj<
s
2
do
if M
0
t
(p)<M
0
t
(q) then
delete(p)
else
delete (q)
end if
end for
G
t
:= Graph (V =P
t
;E =(p;q) inP
t
jjp qj<
s
p
2
)
c
t
:=LargestClusterSize(G
t
)
if c
t
< then
set piezo to assembly mode
else if c
t
= then
switch piezo off
else if c
t
> : then
set piezo to disassembly mode
end if
end for
in the ﬁeld of view of the camera. This information is used to
automatically select the actuation mode required to promote
the formation of the target structure in the shortest time.
A graph G(V;E) is constructed from the output of the
microparticle tracker. Each microparticle tracked within a
central, user-deﬁned circular area deﬁnes a vertex V of
G. An edge E is inserted in G for each connected pair
of microtiles, i.e. closer than a preset range derived from
the microtile size s. A breadth-ﬁrst clustering algorithm is
applied to the adjacency matrix of G to determine the size
of its largest connected cluster c
t
. A control strategy is
implemented based on the comparison between c
t
and the
desired cluster size . If c
t
has lower or larger value than
, the piezoelectric actuator is set to excite the assembly
or disassembly mode of the microchamber, respectively. In
presence of at least one cluster of the desired size (i.e., for
c
t
= ), the actuation is arrested—and the microtiles stop
their motion almost istantaneously given the low Re of the
5863
Fig. 5: Image processing steps. a) captured input image,
b) bandpass-ﬁltered cross correlation (Fourier domain), c)
matching result after inverse Fourier transform and proba-
bilistic ﬁltering, d) ﬁnal tracking displayed on input image.
microchamber (Sect. II-A). The rationale for such bang-bang
control law is discussed in the following section.
III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
The combination of the tracking and decision components
described above results in Algorithm 1 able to close the
control loop of the SelfSys platform. The fully automatic
evolution of the system of microparticles from a sparse initial
state to one with connected clusters of desired size is thus
enabled. Evidence from numerous realizations of the assem-
bly process support the validity of our control approach. It
can successfully direct in real-time the formation of target
structures in spite of the fast and highly stochastic dynamics
of the microtiles in the acousto-ﬂuidic ﬁeld. Fig. 6 and 7
show excerpts from two different assembly realizations.
The driving circuitry of the actuator has negligible latency,
and the high sampling rate of the control software allows for
system’s response times much shorter than human reaction
times. Reaction of microtiles to switches in actuation modes
are not istantaneous. They follow from the relatively slow
reconﬁguration of the ﬂow ﬁeld. The reconﬁguration of the
microtiles upon mode swtiching is not predictable, because
it can be accompanied by subtle rearrangements of the air
bubbles which in turn affect the instantaneous ﬂow ﬁeld and
thus the microtile dynamics. Fine parameter tuning makes
the optical real-time tracking of the microparticles robust
against accidental light reﬂections, microtile misorientations
and shadows. Occasional glitches appear, particularly in
presence of crowding at the center of the microchamber.
Peculiarities of the microchamber and of the vision
system—particularly, the sticky sidewalls, the erratic motion
of the tiles combined with the limited ﬁeld of view of the
optics—make the gathering of statistically signiﬁcant data
on system performance challenging. The PDMS sidewalls of
the microchamber need to be hydrophobic to localize the air
bubbles within the sockets. Yet, the ultrasonic ﬁeld induces
mild cavitation in the chamber, which tends to accumulate
tinier air bubbles along the sidewalls, as well. As a conse-
quence, when immersed in the water of the microchamber the
hydrophobic microtiles tend to stick to the sidewalls by the
same hydrophobic interaction that bonds them together when
clustered. The microtiles can be detached from the sidewalls
by the strong secondary streaming ﬂows originating from
the air bubbles in assembly mode. Upon such actuation, the
microtiles tend to leave the periphery of the microchamber
to aggregate at its center. As a corollary, all assembly
realizations start with the assembly mode. Conversely, the
disassembly mode scatters the microtiles away from the cen-
ter toward the sidewalls, dispersing the undesired aggregates
but also inducing the eventual adhesion of the microtiles to
the sidewalls. Since the sidewalls are outside the ﬁeld of
view of the camera—as mentioned in Sect. II-C—sidewall-
stuck microtiles cannot be tracked by the dedicated software.
As microtiles can enter and exit the ﬁeld of view, the
number of tracked microtiles is generally not constant in
time. This makes the system only partially observable—in
contrast to its macroscopic counterpart [3]. The time-varying
population size makes 1) the accumulation of statistics on the
performance of the system harder, and 2) the dynamics of the
system not respecting conservation laws in terms of number
of units in the system. As a consequence, control strategies
based on, for instance, the computation of the reaction
rates of the assembling system and expectation/maximization
algorithms [3] were not hereby applicable. This motivated the
bang-bang control strategy adopted (Sect. II-D) which, being
independent on the number of microtiles active in the ﬁeld
of view, overcomes the partial observability issue.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
SelfSys is a novel platform for automatic, real-time closed-
loop control of self-assembling systems of microparticles. In
its ultrasonically-actuated microﬂuidic chamber the stochas-
tic reconﬁguration of the assembling units follows from
directed changes of the boundary conditions in the form
of global ﬂow ﬁelds. A bang-bang control law was shown
to direct the formation of target clusters of microparticles
from initially sparse states and out of noisy dynamics. An
enhanced control strategy accounting for the topology of
the target structures is currently being developed. SelfSys
enables contactless manipulation and automatic SA of so-
phisticated functional micro/nanosystems, particularly liquid-
ﬁlled MEMS capsules [21], [22] embedding transducers [23].
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the SelfSys team and the Center of
Micronanotechnology (CMI) of EPFL for constant support.
REFERENCES
[1] G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, “Self-assembly at all scales,”
Science, vol. 295, pp. 2418–2421, 2002.
5864
(a) 2.00 s, assembly mode (b) 2.80 s, disassembly mode (c) 3.92 s, target structure achieved
Fig. 6: Self-assembly sequence for a small microtile set. Dimension of target cluster: 3.
(a) 7.04 s, assembly mode (b) 7.24 s, disassembly mode (c) 7.68 s, target structure achieved
Fig. 7: Self-assembly sequence for a large microtile set. Dimension of target cluster: 5.
[2] M. Mastrangeli, G. Mermoud, and A. Martinoli, “Modeling self-
assembly across scales: The unifying perspective of smart minimal
particles,” Micromachines, vol. 2, pp. 82–115, 2011.
[3] G. Mermoud, M. Mastrangeli, U. Upadhyay, and A. Martinoli, “Real-
time automated modeling and control of self-assembling systems,” in
IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012, pp. 4266–
4273.
[4] G. Mermoud, Stochastic Reactive Distributed Robotic Systems: De-
sign, Modeling and Optimization, ser. Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics. Springer, 2014.
[5] T. G. Leong., A. M. Zarafshar, and D. H. Gracias, “Three-dimensional
fabrication at small size scales,” Small, vol. 6, pp. 792–806, 2010.
[6] M. Mastrangeli, S. Abbasi, C. Varel, C. van Hoof, J.-P. Celis, and
K. F. B¨ ohringer, “Self-assembly from milli- to nanoscales: methods
and applications,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 19, pp. 083 001–
083 037, 2009.
[7] R. J. Knuesel and H. O. Jacobs, “Self-assembly of microscopic
chiplets at a liquidliquidsolid interface forming a ﬂexible segmented
monocrystalline solar cell,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol. 107, pp. 993–
998, 2010.
[8] W. Zheng and H. O. Jacobs, “Fabrication of multicomponent microsys-
tems by directed three-dimensional self-assembly,” Adv. Funct. Mater.,
vol. 15, pp. 732–738, 2005.
[9] T. Kraus, L. Malaquin, H. Schmid, W. Riess, N. D. Spencer, and
W. H., “Nanoparticle printing with single-particle resolution,” Nature
Nanotech., vol. 2, pp. 570–576, 2007.
[10] M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst, and L. M. Liz-Marz´ an,
“Directed self-assembly of nanoparticles,”ACSNano, vol. 4, pp. 3591–
3605, 2010.
[11] G. Mermoud, A. Prorok, L. Matthey, C. M. Cianci, N. Correll,
and A. Martinoli, Handbook of collective robotics: Fundamentals
and challenges. Pan Stanford Publishing, 2012, ch. Self-Organized
Robotic Systems: Large-Scale Experiments in Aggregation and Self-
Assembly using Miniature Robots.
[12] K. Saitou, “Conformational switching in self-assembling mechanical
systems,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 15, pp. 510–520, 1999.
[13] M. T. Tolley, M. Krishnan, D. Erickson, and H. Lipson, “Dynamically
programmable ﬂuidic assembly,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 93, p. 254105,
2008.
[14] B. R. Donald, C. Levey, I. Papronty, and D. Rus, “Planning and Control
for Microassembly of Structures Composed of Stress-Engineered
MEMS Microrobots,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, pp. 218–246, 2013.
[15] S. Miyashita, E. Diller, and M. Sitti, “Two-dimensional magnetic
micro-module reconﬁgurations based on inter-modular interactions,”
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 32, pp. 591–613, 2013.
[16] J. Goldowsky, M. Mastrangeli, L. Jacot-Descombes, M. R. Gullo,
G. Mermoud, J. Brugger, A. Martinoli, B. J. Nelson, and H. Knapp,
“Acousto-ﬂuidic system assisting in-liquid self-assembly of microcom-
ponents,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 23, p. 125026, 2013.
[17] J. Goldowsky and H. Knapp, “Gas penetration through pneumatically
driven PDMS micro valves,” RCS Adv., vol. 3, pp. 17 968 – 17 976,
2013.
[18] M. Mastrangeli, A. Martinoli, and J. Brugger, “Three-dimensional SU-
8 microtiles for ﬂuidic self-assembly,” in 39th Int. Conf. on Micro &
Nano Engineering (MNE), London (UK), 2013.
[19] E. E. Meyer, K. J. Rosenberg, and J. Israelachvili, “Recent progress in
understanding hydrophobic interactions,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., vol.
103, pp. 15 739–15 746, 2006.
[20] T. Lochmatter, P. Roduit, C. Cianci, N. Correll, J. Jacot, and A. Marti-
noli, “SwisTrack - a ﬂexible open source tracking software for multi-
agent systems,” in 2008 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2008, pp. 4004–4010.
[21] L. Jacot-Descombes, C. Martin-Olmos, M. R. Gullo, V . J. Cadarso,
G. Mermoud, L. G. Villanueva, M. Mastrangeli, A. Martinoli, and
J. Brugger, “Fluid-mediated parallel self-assembly of polymeric micro-
capsules for liquid encapsulation and release,” Soft Matter, vol. 9, pp.
9931–9938, 2013.
[22] M. Mastrangeli, L. Jacot-Descombes, M. R. Gullo, and J. Brug-
ger, “Liquid-ﬁlled sealed MEMS capsules fabricated by ﬂuidic self-
assembly,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
(MEMS), 2014, pp. 56–59.
[23] L. Jacot-Descombes, M. R. Gullo, M. Mastrangeli, V . J. Cadarso,
and J. Brugger, “Inkjet printed SU-8 hemispherical microcapsules and
silicon chip embedding,” Micro & Nano Letters, vol. 8, pp. 633–636,
2013.
5865
