Automated Capsulorhexis Based on a Hybrid Magnetic-Mechanical
Actuation System
Franziska Ullrich
1
, Simone Schuerle
1
, Roel Pieters
1
, Avraham Dishy
2
, Stephan Michels
3
and Bradley J. Nelson
1
Abstract—Thispaperpresentsahybridmagnetic-mechanical
manipulation system for automated capsulorhexis utilizing a
ﬂexible catheter with a sharp edge magnetic tip. Vision based
closed loop control is implemented to guide the tip on a circular
pathintheanterioreyesegment.Acontinuousmotionwithhigh
repeatability is achieved. The system shows the ﬁrst catheter-
based application of the electromagnetic manipulation system,
OctoMag, for fast and safe ophthalmic surgery that potentially
reduces the risk of complications and improves precision.
I. INTRODUCTION
Cataracts are the leading cause of blindness and accounts
for 51% of world visual disability [1]. In 2010 17.11% of
the U.S. population over 40 years of age were affected by
this visual impairment [2]. Cataracts are often associated and
increasing with old age. The disease describes the gradual
opaciﬁcation of the crystalline lens and is clinically graded
according to color, opacity and amount of cortical, nuclear
and posterior subcapsular cataract. It is routinely treated by
surgery, where corneal incisions are made at the limbus to
allow for insertion of instruments into the aqueous anterior
chamber of the eye. Subsequently, a bent needle (cystotome)
or a special forceps is used to create a circular hole in
the anterior lens capsule, a procedure known as continuous
circularcapsulorhexis,illustratedinFigure1.Thelensisthen
hydrated to delineate the capsule from the cortex, followed
by breaking the lens into fragments using phacoemulsiﬁ-
cation and subsequent removal of the fragments from the
capsular bag. After inﬂation of the capsular bag with a
viscoelastic ﬂuid, an artiﬁcial foldable intraocular lens (IOL)
is injected into the capsular bag. The size, shape and location
of the opening in the anterior lens capsule are crucial. No
tears should occur in the lens capsule during or after surgery
as it could prevent implanting the IOL in the capsular bag
[3]. It has been shown that posterior capsular opaciﬁcation
(PCO) can be prevented by opening the anterior lens capsule
circularly in the centre of the lens with a diameter between
5mm and 7mm, so that the anterior lens capsule can overlap
with the IOL optic surface and stabilize it [4], [5]. The ideal
capsulorhexis edge should be continuous to allow for highest
strength [3] and has been suggested to overlap with the IOL
optics by 0.5mm [6]. Achieving an intact, centrally located,
1
Institute for Robotics and Intelligent Systems (IRIS), ETH Zurich,
Tannenstrasse 3, 8092 Zurich, Switzerland bnelson@ethz.ch
2
Department of Ophthalmology, Kantonsspital Aarau, Tellstrasse, 5001
Aarau, Switzerland
3
Department of Ophthalmology,Triemli Hospital Zurich, Birmensdorfer-
strasse 497, 8063 Zurich, Switzerland
!
!
!
!
!
!
©!
cornea 
lens 
lens capsule 
iris 
capsulorhexis 
tool 
optic nerve 
sclera 
retina 
vitreous body 
Fig. 1. The basic anatomy of the human eye and a more detailed view
of the anterior section of the eye. Capsulorhexis is one of the key steps in
cataract surgery and describes the process of creating a circular hole in the
lens capsule.
and perfectly circular capsulorhexis is crucial to the safety
and best outcome of cataract surgery. This surgery requires
high precision and is technically difﬁcult to learn as the
delicate structures of the anterior eye are under constant
risk of damage due to the rigid instruments used by the
ophthalmologist and a lack of precision arising from the
limits of human force perception [7], [8].
Several robotic platforms have been developed to assist
in ophthalmic surgery for decreasing the risk of damage
to the delicate structures of the eye and for faster recovery
of the patient, and thus, making procedures safer and eas-
ier. Teleoperation systems [9]–[11], cooperatively controlled
hand-over-hand system [12] and freehand active tremor-
ﬁltering systems [13] have been suggested to aid in eye
surgery. Moreover, recent emerging technologies have paved
the way for ﬂexible surgical tools, such as magnetically
guided catheters to increase stability, precision and minimize
the risk of perforation of tissue [14]–[16]. Systems utilizing
permanent magnets [17] or electromagnets [18], [19] guide
a magnetic catheter precisely during medical procedures.
Inthispaperweproposeasystemforautomatedminimally
invasive capsulorhexis utilizing a ﬂexible catheter with a
customized curved needle as end-effector. This tool is used
to circumscribe a circular path inside the aqueous chamber
of the eye to create a well-deﬁned capsulorhexis in the
anterior lens capsule in a continuous movement. The catheter
is guided with a hybrid magnetic-mechanical actuation sys-
tem consisting of a linear piezoelectric actuator (PEA) that
controls the longitudinal motion of the tip while the lateral
movement is controlled by an electromagnetic manipulation
system, the OctoMag.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4387
2 mm 
 !
NdFeB 
Catheter 20 G 
needle 
(a) (b)
Fig. 2. a) The magnetic tool for capsulorhexis consists of a 2 Fr PUR
catheter with a bent 20 gauge injection needle. b) The tool in front of a
porcine lens for size comparison.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. Magnetic Catheter
The surgical instrument used for capsulorhexis consists of
a conventional polyurethane (PUR) catheter (2 Fr, Vygon,
Aachen, Germany) with an outer diameter of 0.6mm and
an inner diameter of 0.3mm. The customized end-effector
consists of the bent tip of a 20 gauge injection needle and is
attached to one end of the PUR catheter. Three cylindri-
cal Neodymimum-Iron-Boron (NdFeB) magnets (diameter
0.5mm and length 1.0mm) with a combined magnetic
volume of 0.589mm
3
are inserted into the needle tip without
separation. The magnetic tool is illustrated in Figure 2.
B. Piezoelectric Actuator
Movements of the catheter tip in longitudinal direction
are governed by a linear cartesian piezoelectric stepping
actuator (SLC-1740, SmarAct GmbH, Oldenburg, Germany)
with only one active direction. This manipulator consists
of three linear positioners that each allow for 21mm of
travel and are mounted on a base plate with an integrated
sensor module to perform closed loop positioning control
with a sensor resolution of 50nm, whereas the ﬂexibility
of the catheter might reduce the positioning precision and
accuracy of the full system. The linear actuator is activated
with customized software written in LabView (National
Instruments, Austin, TX, US). Prior to execution, a ﬁle is
generated with a MATLAB simulation, explained in section
III-B, that describes the desired path with preset spatial step
size. The software initializes the positioner and feeds the
desired position values to the PEA controller, such that the
manipulator moves each step before waiting a determined
time t
sleep
in [ms]. Hence, the longitudinal velocity of the
catheter is regulated by the PEA. The actuator allows for
maximum velocity of 13mm/s. The advancing velocity of
the catheter was recorded with a vision based blob tracker
at different spatial step sizes and with various sleep times,
as illustrated in Figure 3.
C. Magnetic Manipulation System
The OctoMag was introduced by Kummer et al. [20] in
2010. A second version was built in 2011, shown in Figure
4a), that is movable and mechanically more stable than the
prototype. It also allows for slightly higher magnetic ﬁelds
of up to 40mT and magnetic ﬁeld gradients of 1T/m. The
OctoMag has been shown to successfully guide untethered
microrobots during minimally invasive surgery in the poste-
rioreyesegmentinexvivoandinvivoapplications[21],[22].
The system consists of eight electromagnetic coils with soft-
magnetic cores in a hemispherical arrangement. The central
workspace created by this arrangement is 20? 20? 20mm,
andbyadjustingthecurrentswithintheelectromagneticcoils
the magnetic ﬁelds and magnetic gradients can be controlled,
guiding magnetic devices with high spatial precision [23].
The lateral motion of the magnetic needle tip of the catheter
is observed through a CCD camera at 120 Hz (Grasshopper
03K2C-C, Pointgrey, BC, Canada) and is visually guided
in the horizontal plane by a controller, described in section
III, through the OctoMag workspace. The complete system
consisting of OctoMag and PEA that is utilized for ﬂexible
catheter control for capsulorhexis is sketched in Figure
4b). It should be noted, that the OctoMag is capable of 5
degree-of-freedom control, and hence is over actuated for
the application described in this work as only lateral motion
of the catheter and its pitch are controlled.
III. CONTROL
A. Governing Equations
The catheter tip is equipped with three cylindrical NeFeB
magnets with a diameter of 0.5mm and length 1mm with
total magnetization M in [A/m]. It is assumed that the
magnetization is largest along the longitudinal direction of
the catheter while magnetization in the radial direction can
be neglected. When the catheter tip is positioned within
the workspace, it is exposed to an external magnetic ﬁeld
H in [A/m], generated by the OctoMag. The magnetic
ﬂux density B in [T] is derived by B= µ
0
H, where µ
0
=
4p ? 10
  7
Tm/A is the permeability of vacuum. When an
external magnetic ﬁeld is generated, the magnetic torque
per volume T = M? B in [N/m
2
] aligns the magnetic
catheter tip with the applied ﬁeld B. As no electric current
ﬂows through the workspace occupied by the catheter tip,
— ? B=0, and
F=(— ·B)
T
M=
h
∂B
∂x
∂B
∂y
∂B
∂z
i
T
M (1)
the magnetic force per volume in [N/m
3
] can be written as
F=(M·— )B. The OctoMag consists of eight electromagnets
100 150 200 250
0
1
2
3
4
sleep time (ms)
velocity (mm/s)
 
 
stepsize 100  µm
stepsize 250  µm
stepsize 500  µm
Fig. 3. Velocity of the catheter tip in [mm/s] as a result of sleep time in
[ms] and step size in [µm] of the PEA as measured with visual tracking.
4388
(a)
Linear!
piezoelectric 
actuator 
Catheter 
OctoMag  
(b)
Fig. 4. a) The magnetic manipulation system OctoMag including eight
electromagnetic coils. The second version is mechanically more stable and
can generate slightly higher magnetic ﬁelds than the prototype, which
was introduced in [20]. b) The hybrid magnetic-mechanical system with
a linear piezoelectric actuator (PEA) and the magnetic manipulation system
OctoMag as seen from above.
that each create a magnetic ﬁeld, which can be precomputed.
The magnetic ﬁeld at a point P in the workspace due to
activating a single electromagnet e is given as B
e
(P)=
˜
B
e
(P)i
e
,where
˜
B
e
istheunitcontributionandi
e
isthecurrent
in coil e, respectively. By imposing the ﬁelds generated by
all electromagnets at a point P in the workspace the ﬁeld at
this point is derived as
B(P)=
8
Â e=1
˜
B
e
(P)i
e
=B(P)I (2)
where vector I holds the currents in each coil andB(P) is
a3? 8 unit ﬁeld contribution matrix that can be analyti-
cally calculated online or interpolated from precomputed or
measured points. Magnetic force and torque applied to the
catheter tip can be expressed as

T
F
 
=
2 6 6 6 4 Sk(
ˆ
M)B(P)
ˆ
M
T ∂B
∂x
(P)
ˆ
M
T ∂B
∂y
(P)
ˆ
M
T ∂B
∂z
(P)
3 7 7 7 5 2 6 4 i
1
.
.
.
i
8
3 7 5 =A(
ˆ
M,P)I (3)
where the eight electromagnet currents are mapped to mag-
netic force and torque through the 6? 8 actuation matrix
A(
ˆ
M,P) and Sk(
ˆ
M) is the skew-symmetric matrix form of
ˆ
M. To remove any dependencies on the magnetic properties
of the catheter tip material the magnetization M is normal-
izedwithrespecttothe volumemagnetizationofthematerial
in [Am
2
] and written as
ˆ
M. For a desired torque/force
vector to manipulate the magnetic catheter tip, the required
currents in the electromagnets can be found by using the
pseudoinverse ofA
I =A(
ˆ
M,P)
†

T
des
F
des
 
(4)
A detailed mathematical model describing the OctoMag can
be found in [24].
With the current system the applied torques are much
more effective on the motion of the magnetic catheter tip
than applied forces. The forces, derived from magnetic
gradients, are too weak to actively pull and push the long
catheter body and its tip. Therefore, the longitudinal motion
of the catheter is governed by the PEA while the catheter
orientation is controlled by applying magnetic torques. In
order to cut through the capsular bag of the lens during
capsulorhexis,forcesinverticaldirectioncanbeapplied.The
catheter is controlled in an aqueous environment to model
real conditions in the aqueous chamber of the anterior eye.
B. Kinematic model
To simulate the control of the magnetic catheter tip on
a circular path, a kinematic model is derived in MATLAB
that calculates the motion parameters of the catheter. It is
assumed that there is zero curvature along the length of the
catheter, i.e. that it is a straight line at all times. The user
deﬁnes the anchor point A of the catheter, at which a shaft
restricts the lateral motion of the catheter, corresponding to
the insertion point in a physical procedure. To approach the
circular path, described by points K
j
=(x
j
,y
j
), the catheter
travels a predeﬁned longitudinal distance of length L, as
illustrated in Figure 5. The length l
j
of the catheter at point
K
j
is given by l
j
=kAK
j
k whereas the angle of orientation
of the catheter tip a j
is given by
a j
=arcsin
 
x
j
kAK
j
k
!
(5)
Figure 6 illustrates the parameters a j
and l
j
versus time. In
this example, a circle with radius R= 5mm is circumscribed
by the simulated catheter tip within a time of 10s where
distance L= 3mm.
C. Closed Loop Control
For model based closed loop control the catheter tip is
visually tracked at all times using a blob tracking algorithm,
L 
R
l
j
 
?
j
 
Catheter with 
magnetic tip 
Anchor shaft 
K
j
 
A 
y 
x 
C 
Fig. 5. The catheter is anchored at the anchor shaft A, it describes a
circular path with radius R with parameters l
j
and a j
. The length of the
catheter l
j
is governed by the PEA while orientation a j
is controlled by the
OctoMag.
4389
1 mm 
Fig. 12. Segment of a circular cut with diameter 5mm in agarose as a
capsular lens phantom. The dashed circle segment has a radius of 2.5mm.
catheter tip is controlled by the electromagnetic manipu-
lation system OctoMag. Vision based closed loop control
is implemented and guides the bent needle at the tip of
a ﬂexible catheter along a continuous circular path with
high repeatability. Furthermore, the size and location of the
capsulorhexis can be predeﬁned by the user. The demon-
strated application of a magnetically oriented catheter is
fully automated and shows reproducible results within short
duration time, thus, indicating the potential for fast and
safe ophthalmic application that potentially does not require
excessive medical training. Especially in the underdeveloped
world, where a lack of access to ophthalmic surgeons exists,
automated capsulorhexis could assist less skilled operators
to perform surgery.
A ﬁrst catheter-based ophthalmic application of the Oc-
toMag is presented in the anterior segment of the eye,
demonstrating the versatility of this electromagnetic manip-
ulation system in combination with a mechanical actuator.
Flexible catheters with magnetic tips are promising tools to
assist in minimally invasive capsulorhexis, especially when
a predeﬁned path needs to be followed in a continuous
movementwithhighrepeatability.Futureworkwilltargetthe
implementation of catheter stiffness in the kinematic model
andthemodelbasedclosedloopcontroltoincreaseaccuracy.
Furthermore, the performance of the system will be tested in
ex vivo experiments. Eventually, results of automated capsu-
lorhexis based on hybrid magnetic-mechanical actuation will
be compared to capsulorhexis done manually by ophthalmic
surgeons.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
TheauthorswouldliketothankDr.KatjaUllrichfromThe
Royal Adelaide Hospital for helpful comments on cataract
and capsulorhexis. Thanks also goes to Janis Edelmann,
Anandeshwar Singh and Taylor Newton for their ideas and
help with software and hardware. This work was sup-
ported by the European Research Council Advanced Grant
BOTMED.
REFERENCES
[1] World Health Organization (WHO), “Priority eye diseases”, available
at: http://www.who.int/blindness/causes/priority/
en/index1.html, accessed: 7.8.2013.
[2] National Eye Institute (NEI), “2010 U.S. Age-Speciﬁc Prevalence
Rates for Cataract by Age, and Race/Ethnicity”, available at: http:
//www.nei.nih.gov/eyedata/cataract.asp#1, accessed:
7.8.2013.
[3] J. Bolger, “How to master capsulorhexis”, in Eye, vol. 9, pp. 526-529,
1995.
[4] R. J. Olson et al., “Cataract treatment in the beginning of the 21st
century”,inAmericanJournalofOphthalmology,vol.136(1),pp.146-
154, 2003.
[5] T. Raviv, “The perfectly sized capsulorhexis”, in J. Cataract Refract.
Surg., vol. 6, pp. 37-41, June 2009.
[6] Ravalico, G., Tognetto, D., Palomba, M., Busatto, P., Baccara, F.
(1996), “Capsulorhexis size and posterior capsule opaciﬁcation” in
Journal of Cataract and Refractive Surgery, vol. 22(1), pp. 98-103,
January 1996.
[7] P.K. Gupta, P.S. Jensen, E. de Juan Jr , “Surgical Forces and Tactile
Perception During Retinal Microsurgery” in Medical Image Comput-
ing and Computer-Assisted Intervention-MICCAI99, Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, pp. 1218-1225, January 1999.
[8] A.D. Jagtap, C.N. Riviere, “Applied force during vitreoretinal mi-
crosurgery with handheld instruments”, in Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society, 2004, IEMBS’04. 26th Annual International
Conference of the IEEE, pp. 2771 - 2773, September 2004.
[9] D. Bourla et al, “Feasibility study of intraocular robotic surgery with
thedaVincisurgicalsystem”,inRetina,vol.28(1),pp.154-158,2008.
[10] T. Nakano, N. Sugita, T. Ueta, Y. Tamaki, M. Mitsuishi, “A paral-
lel robot to assist vitreoretinal surgery”, in International Journal of
Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, vol. 4(6), pp.517 - 526,
November 2009.
[11] I. Tsui, A. Tsirbas, C.W. Mango, S.D. Schwartz, J.P. Hubschman,
“Robotic Surgery in Ophthalmology”, InTech, 2010, ch. 10.
[12] A. Uneri, M.A. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R.H. Taylor, I.
Iordachita, “New steady-hand Eye Robot with micro-force sensing for
vitreoretinal surgery”, in Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics
(BioRob), 2010 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference
on , pp.814,819, September 2010.
[13] R.A. MacLachlan, B.C. Becker, J. Cuevas Tabares, G.W. Podnar, L.A.
Lobes, C.N. Riviere, “Micron: an actively stabilized handheld tool for
microsurgery”, in Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 28(1), pp. 195
- 212, February 2012.
[14] J. Moreno, et al., “Ablation of Atrioventricular Nodal Reentrant
Tachycardia Using Remote Magnetic Guidance (Stereotaxis) Requires
Lower Temperature and Power Settings Because of Improved Local
Contact”, Revista Espaola de Cardiologa (English Edition), vol. 62(9),
pp. 1001 - 1011, September 2009.
[15] S. Ernst, et al., “Initial Experience With Remote Catheter Ablation
Using a Novel Magnetic Navigation System”, in Circulation, vol.
109(12), pp. 1472 - 1475, March 2004.
[16] B.L.Nguyen,J.L.Merino,E.S.Gang,“Remotenavigationforablation
procedures–A new step forward in the treatment of cardiac arrhyth-
mias”, in Eur. J. Cardiol., vol. 6, pp. 50 - 56, August 2010.
[17] Stereotaxis, “Robotic Navigation”, available at: http://www.
stereotaxis.com, accessed: 4.9.2013
[18] Magnetecs, “Guiding medical technology”, available at: http://
www.magnetecs.com, accessed: 4.9.2013
[19] Aeon Scientiﬁc AG, “Magnetic Catheter Steering System (Cmag)”,
available at: http://www.aeon-scientific.com, accessed:
4.9.2013
[20] M. Kummer, J. J. Abbott, B. E. Kratochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul, B. J.
Nelson, “OctoMag: An Electromagnetic System for 5-DOF Wireless
Micromanipulation”, in Proc. of IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), May 2010.
[21] C. Bergeles, M. Kummer, B. E. Kratochvil, C. Framme, B. J. Nelson,
“Steerable Intravitreal Inserts for Drug Delivery: In Vitro and Ex
Vivo Mobility Experiments”, Proc. in 14th International Conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention
(MICCAI 2011), September 2011.
[22] F. Ullrich, C. Bergeles, J. Pokki, O. Ergeneman, S. Erni, G. Chatzipir-
piridis, S. Pan, C. Framme, B. J. Nelson, “Mobility experiments with
microrobots for minimally invasive intraocular surgery”, in Investiga-
tive Ophthalmology and Visual Science, vol. 54(4), pp. 2853-63, April
2013.
[23] C. Bergeles, B. E. Kratochvil, B. J. Nelson, “Visually servoing
magnetic intraocular microdevices”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 28(4), pp. 798-809, 2012.
[24] M. Kummer, J. J. Abbott, B. E. Kratochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul, B. J.
Nelson, “OctoMag: An Electromagnetic System for 5-DOF Wireless
Micromanipulation”, in IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26(6),
pp. 1006 - 1017, September 2010.
4392
