Terrain Identiﬁcation on a One-Legged Hopping Robot using
High-Resolution Pressure Images
Jacob J. Shill
a
, Emmanuel G. Collins, Jr.
a
, Eric Coyle
b
, and Jonathan Clark
c
a
Center for Intelligent Systems, Control, and Robotics (CISCOR)
c
Scansorial and Terrestrial Robotics and Integrated Design Lab (STRIDe)
a;c
Department of Mechanical Engineering, FAMU & FSU College of Engineering, Tallahassee, FL, USA
b
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Embry-Riddle Aeron University, Daytona Beach, FL, USA
jjs05e@my.fsu.edu, ecollins@eng.fsu.edu, coylee1@erau.edu, jeclark@fsu.edu
Abstract— For efﬁcient and safe locomotion the gaits of
legged robots should vary with the type of terrain. Hence,
terrain surface classiﬁcation is an important problem for
this class of mobile robots. Prior research has developed
approaches to proprioceptive terrain classiﬁcation for both
wheeled and limbed robots that use sensor measurements
dependent upon the dynamics of the robot, which ultimately
requires the classiﬁcation system to be trained at a large
number of operating conditions (e.g., vehicle speeds and loads).
This research develops an approach to terrain identiﬁcation
based on pressure images generated through direct surface
contact using a robot skin constructed around a high-resolution
pressure sensing array. Terrain signatures for classiﬁcation
are formulated from the magnitude frequency responses of
the pressure images. The methodology is used to train and
test a classiﬁer using dynamically measured pressure images
from a one-legged hopping robot. Experimental tests yield high
classiﬁcation accuracies, which are independent with respect
to changing robot dynamics (i.e., different leg gaits). The
ﬁndings of this paper suggest the methodology can be extended
to autonomous ﬁeld robots, providing the robot with crucial
information about the environment that can be used to aid
stability over rough terrains and enhance motion planning over
varying terrains.
I. INTRODUCTION
A robot’s locomotion stability and operating efﬁciency
depend on the device’s control strategy, leg gait, and the
operating environment. Previous research with legged robots
has developed a variety of stable leg gaits [1], [2], [3]. A
robot’s performance however, can be heavily dependent on
the type of terrain the robot is traversing [4], [5]. As a
result of this terrain dependence, it is important to develop
methodologies that enable a limbed robot to recognize new
terrain surfaces as they are encountered.
Proprioceptive terrain classiﬁcation has been accomplished
in wheeled vehicles and electric powered wheelchairs pri-
marily by using vibration sensors [6], [7], [8]. For AQUA,
a RHex-type legged robot, proprioceptive classiﬁcation has
been performed by using robot leg angles and corresponding
leg motor driving currents [9]. Even more recently, the
leg motor currents in conjunction with dynamic models for
the X-RHex Lite (XRL) robot have been used for surface
identiﬁcation [10]. However, a limitation of each of the above
proprioceptive classiﬁcation methods is that the terrain sig-
natures used for classiﬁcation are heavily dependent on the
vehicle operating conditions such as the speed and load since
the measurements are a function of the vehicle’s vibration
dynamics. (This is discussed in some detail for wheeled
robots in [11].) Hence, robust terrain classiﬁcation requires
training for a wide variety of operating conditions, which
is a time consuming process and increases classiﬁcation
computational times.
This paper introduces a new proprioceptive method for
terrain identiﬁcation on limbed robots that is largely indepen-
dent of the vehicle operating condition since it uses sensors
that come into direct intermittent contact with the terrain
surface. Based on a model of human skin, a robot skin is con-
structed using a high-resolution pressure sensing array. This
robot skin is called Pressure Sensitive Robot Skin (PreSRS,
pronounced ”pressures”). A classiﬁcation methodology is
developed using the magnitude spatial frequency response of
the pressure images obtained using PreSRS. An experiment
applying PreSRS to a one-legged robot, the FAMU-FSU
Hopper, demonstrates high classiﬁcation accuracy can be
achieved on four common terrain types.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II details
how biological inspiration dictated the methodology used
to design PreSRS. Section III describes how PreSRS was
integrated onto the FAMU-FSU Hopper. Section IV presents
the results from dynamic terrain classiﬁcation experiments
on the hopping robot. The results provide strong evidence
that the classiﬁcation approach based on PreSRS images is
not dependent upon the vehicle’s operating conditions (e.g.,
leg gait). Section V concludes the paper and presents future
work.
II. PRESRS:
PRESSURE SENSITIVE ROBOT SKIN
Touch is mediated in human skin using four types of nerve
receptors named Merkel, Rufﬁni, Pacini, and Meissner [12].
Nerve ending clusters respond to static and dynamic skin
deformation events by sending the form, texture, location,
and/or pressure intensity information of the contacting sur-
face to the brain [13]. These qualities of human skin inspired
the development of PreSRS using a high-resolution pressure
sensing array, the TekScan
R 
#5051 sensor.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
U.S. Government work not protected by
U.S. copyright
4723
Fig. 1. (a) The TekScan
R 
high-resolution #5051 pressure sensing array
attached to the Evolution
R 
data acquisition device [14]. A penny placed
on the sensing array provides a size reference. (b) A schematic of PreSRS
referencing its multiple layers of compliant material to human skin layers,
which posses similar mechanical properties.
The sensing array, shown in Fig. 1(a), consists of 1936
individual piezoelectric based pressure sensors, evenly ar-
ranged in a 44 sensor 44 sensor grid. The sensing array
effectively measures pressure distribution across a 55.88 mm
 55.88 mm area within a 0-138 kPa range. Sensor readings
are acquisitioned with the Evolution
R 
device, also displayed
in Fig. 1(a), at a 100 Hz sampling rate [14]. Measurements
are saved as 8-bit 44 pixel 44 pixel imagesI, andI(i;j)
represents the pixel corresponding to the individual sensor
with grid indexes (i;j).
Human skin consists of the three layers displayed in
Fig. 1(b): the (lower) subcutaneous layer, the (middle) dermis
layer, and the (outer) epidermis layer.
As illustrated with the PreSRS schematic in Fig. 1(b), the
subcutaneous and epidermis skin layers were emulated using
sheets of compliant material (each >3 mm thick). Human
skin is a non-homogenous viscoelastic material, possessing
mechanical properties that vary between individuals and skin
location [15], [16]. The subcutaneous layer has a desired
compliant property of conforming the skin to surfaces, al-
lowing many nerve endings to make contact. A felt type
material was found to have this property.
Fig. 1(b) correlates the high-resolution sensing array to
the dermis layer of human skin where the nerve receptors
reside. The sensor pitch value of 1.27 mm (i.e., the distance
between sensors) closely matches human nerve pitch (i.e.,
the distance between nerves), which can be approximately
1.00 mm in ﬁnger tips [17].
The protective nature of the epidermal human skin layer
was replicated with a hard silicon-rubber covering (>1 mm
thick), as shown in Fig. 1(b). The silicon-rubber material
has a high stiffness; therefore it deforms negligibly under
compression and is resistant to puncture damage.
Altogether, PreSRS is approximately 10 mm thick. Each
PreSRS layer was bonded together with 3M
TM
Super 77 spray
adhesive.
III. PRESRS ON A ONE-LEGGED HOPPING ROBOT
Fig. 2(a) displays the FAMU-FSU Hopper, which can be
modeled as a Spring Loaded-Inverted Pendulum (SLIP). The
robot has two operating phases, as illustrated in Fig. 2(b):
a stance phase, in which the hopper is in contact with a
surface, and a ﬂight phase [18].
Fig. 2. (a) The one-legged hopping robot, the FAMU-FSU Hopper, used
with PreSRS. (b) Illustration of the robot’s stance and ﬂight phases.
Stance phase control uses an Active Energy Removal
(AER) protocol that changes the robot leg length during a
stance as described by,
(t) =
o
 
dev
sin(!t+); (1)
where 
o
corresponds to the robot rest leg length, 
dev
depicts the amplitude of recirculation, and the two control
parameters ! and  set the desired frequency and phase of
recirculation, respectfully. The AER protocol was designed
to allow the hopper to robustly run over large obstacles (up
to 20% of the robot leg length) [4].
During the ﬂight phase, the controller sets the next robot
leg touchdown angle 
TD
n+1
using the governing equation,

TD
n+1
=
LO
n
+c(
TD
n
 
TD
des
); (2)
4724
where
TD
n
is the previous leg touchdown angle,
LO
n
is the
previous leg liftoff angle,c is a weighted parameter, and
TD
des
is the desired touchdown angle.
The four control parameters!,,c, and
TD
des
mandate leg
gaits G
i
(!;;c;
TD
des
). Parameters  and c are stabilizing
factors, and parameters ! and 
TD
des
institute the robot’s
forward velocity and hop height [4], [18].
Fig. 3. A sectioned and labeled CAD model of the biologically inspired
foot built to accommodate PreSRS on the FAMU-FSU Hopper.
The surface area of the original hopper foot was too small
to accommodate PreSRS, which has a 55.88 mm 55.88
mm sensing area (44 pixel 44 pixel). Hence, a new robot
foot was designed featuring an elliptical base with cross-
sectional dimensions of 48.3 mm  52.1 mm (38 pixel
 41 pixel), as illustrated in Fig. 3. Taking design cues
from human ankle biology, enables this new foot to capture
consistent high-quality pressure measurements.
The human ankle allows the foot to remain stationary
relative to the ground during a step; compressing the vis-
coelastic adipose tissue beneath the heel, dissipating energy
and shock, and conforming the skin to the contacting surface
[19], [20]. These biological qualities are replicated with a
mechanically compliant ball joint connecting the foot to the
hopper leg. Mechanical compliance is governed with the
compression spring of Fig. 3. The connection allows the foot
to pitch, yaw, and roll as the robot leg progresses through
a step. The compliant layers composing PreSRS, shown in
Fig. 1(b), compress at impact, which both absorb impact
shock and maximize the contact area between the high-
resolution pressure array and terrain.
Both the ankle and skin compliances contribute to the
dynamic behavior exhibited by the hopper foot during a step,
as illustrated in Fig. 4 with high-speed frame shots. As seen
in Fig. 4, the foot base ﬂattens, conforming to the surface,
and remains stationary relative to the ground over the entirety
Fig. 4. High-speed video frame shots of the newly designed hopper foot;
(Start of Stance) immediately after impacting a surface; (Mid Stance) half
way through a step; (End of Stance) the instant before the foot looses contact
with the surface.
of the step period, as the robot leg pivots about the ball joint
of Fig. 3 from touchdown angle 
TD
n
to liftoff angle 
LO
n
.
IV. TERRAIN CLASSIFICATION
Previous terrain classiﬁcation techniques that use data
inﬂuenced by the robot dynamics have shown to be effective
(achieving accuracies above 90%), so long as the robot
operates in the same manner (i.e., leg gaitG
i
) that is used to
train the classiﬁer [8], [9], [10]. Changing operating modes,
however, changes the dynamic behavior of the robot, which
changes the terrain sensor data. As a result, classiﬁers for
these systems have to be trained with data from multiple
operating conditions.
A key motivation for developing PreSRS was to accu-
rately identify terrains regardless of the system operating
conditions. PreSRS was designed to capture terrain features
through direct contact and not via the robot dynamics. There-
fore, a classiﬁer trained with pressure images associated with
hopper leg gaitG
i
should accurately identify terrain samples
collected from gait G
j
, where i6=j.
It follows from the discussion in Section III, that for ﬁxed
stabilizing factors  and c, a hopper leg gait G
i
(!, , c,

TD
des
) can be deﬁned with the two control parameters! and

TD
des
. Three distinct leg gaits were used in this experiment,
G
1
( 6.0 rad/sec, 0.27 rad), G
2
(6.5 rad/sec, 0.42 rad), and
G
3
(7.0 rad/sec, 0.57 rad); each successive gait differed by
increasing the control parameters ! and 
TD
des
.
Dynamic pressure images were collected using PreSRS
and the FAMU-FSU Hopper on four terrain types: smooth
pine wood planks, standard ﬂooring carpet, semi-moist clay
dirt, and thick Spanish style grass. The circular (2.8 m
diameter) track housed the terrains with barriers around the
inside and outside perimeter.
Table I displays the average forward velocity of the robot
per leg gaitG
i
on each tested terrain. It should be noted that
the robot operated at a greater speed on the grass terrain
when compared to the velocities seen on the three other
tested terrain types. The compliant nature of the grass used
in this experiment may have tuned the hopper effective leg
stiffness. Related research has shown that tuning leg stiffness
on a RHex type robot can improve locomotion performance
[21]. The variant forward velocities between terrains, shown
in Table I, underscores the importance of a robot knowing
4725
Fig. 5. Example pressure images for each test terrain captured with PreSRS
on the FAMU-FSU Hopper. The images contain 38 pixels 41 pixels,
which correlates to a 48.3 mm 52.1 mm sensing area.
the terrain so that the leg gait parameters can be adjusted
accordingly.
TABLE I
HOPPER FORWARD VELOCITIES
Average Velocities [m/sec]
Gait Wood Carpet Clay Grass
G
1
0.40 0.43 0.38 0.81
G
2
0.64 0.63 0.61 1.11
G
3
0.99 0.97 0.84 1.49
The multiple images per terrain type and per leg gait
recorded with PreSRS were allocated into three data setsS
1
,
S
2
, andS
3
, corresponding to hopper leg gaits G
1
, G
2
, and
G
3
, respectfully. Over 300 pressure imagesI were collected
per leg gait G
i
, for a total of 961 images. The bottom 6
rows and ﬁrst 3 columns of image setsS
1
,S
2
, andS
3
were
cropped to ﬁt the new hopper foot dimensions 48.3 mm
52.1 mm or 38 pixels 41 pixels, corresponding to 1558
individual sensors.
Examples of pressure images for each terrain type, taken
when the robot was operating with leg gait G
2
are shown
in the second column of Fig. 5 in grayscale, where brighter
pixels depict higher intensity values. As shown in Fig. 5,
the fact that terrain samples captured using PreSRS can be
visually distinguished, suggest strong evidence that a high
accuracy classiﬁer can be developed.
The Evolution
R 
acquisition device, displayed in Fig. 1(a),
records sensor data at 100 Hz. The stance time (i.e., the
amount of time the hopper keeps contact with a surface)
was approximately 140 msec for each leg gait G
i
. The
classiﬁcation results described in this section were obtained
by using the middle (i.e., the 7
th
) recorded pressure image
for classiﬁcation purposes.
It has been shown in [8], [22] that the magnitude frequency
response of the spatial domain terrain sample constitutes
signatures unique to the terrain type. Hence, it can be used
to deﬁne feature vectors for use with a classiﬁer.
Feature vectors sets F
1
, F
2
and F
3
2 R
n
, where n =
1025, corresponding to terrain data collected at each leg gait
G
1
, G
2
, and G
3
respectively, are computed as follows: The
rows of the 2D pressure imagesI are ﬁrst aligned and padded
with zeroes to obtainX2R
N
, such that
X = vec(I); (3)
where vec() is the standard row algining operator, andN =
2048. The Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) is used to compute
the (spatial) Discrete Fourier TransformY2C
N
, given by
Y(k+1) =
N 1
X
`=0
X(`+1)e
 j2k`=N
; (4)
k = 0;1;:::;N 1;
whereY(i) denotes the i
th
element of the vectorY. Next,
letZ2R
N
denote the vector containing the magnitudes of
the elements ofY such that
Z(i) = abs(Y(i)); i = 1;2;:::;N: (5)
Since the elements ofZ are mirrored, only the ﬁrst half of
the elements are placed in a feature vectorF2R
n
, where
n =N=2+1 = 1025.
Example magnitude frequency responses (i.e., feature vec-
torsF
i
) on the each tested surface type are shown in Fig. 6.
A key characteristic shared by feature vectorsF
1
,F
2
, and
F
3
in Fig. 6, is that in each plot the magnitude spikes occur
at the same frequency intervals (48.3 cycle/mm) but with
different intensities on each terrain. This frequency interval
is an artifact of the piecewise row aligning operation of
(3). Spike magnitude differences between terrain types create
distinguishing metrics for a classiﬁer to identify.
4726
Fig. 6. Sample magnitude frequency response feature vectorsF
i
2 R
n
,
where n = 1025, for each of the four tested terrains. Each of the plots
contains the three feature vectors F
1
, F
2
, and F
3
corresponding to leg
gaits G
1
, G
2
, and G
3
for comparison.
Another aspect of Fig. 6, is that the plots seem to contain
only one feature vector signature; in fact there are three
separate feature signatures in each plot correlating to F
1
,
F
2
, andF
3
, respectfully. The feature vectors for each terrain
type, show almost indistinguishable proﬁles. These ﬁnding
indicate that the pressure based terrain signatures, captured
using PreSRS, are indifferent to changes in robot leg gaits.
A Parzen Windows Estimation (PWE) classiﬁer, which is
described in [23] in the context of terrain classiﬁcation, was
trained with 20 randomly selected feature vectors, per terrain
type (80 total), from setF
2
. The 20 feature vectors were split
into two sets: 13 for a training setT2R
pn
, wherep = 52,
and 7 for a validation setV2R
qn
, where q = 28.
Principal Component Analysis (PCA) was applied dur-
ing training to determine a reduced feature space h; this
process is discussed in [23]. Using PCA to train the PWE
classiﬁer reduces the feature dimensions from n = 1025
to h = 51. As a result, terrain identiﬁcation computation
times are approximately 0.245 msec when implemented on
a 2.67 GHz Intel
R 
Core
TM
2 Duo CPU. Training produces
a transformation matrix U2 R
hn
for reducing the input
feature vector space and a matrix P2 R
h(p+q)
that has
columns that are reduced order feature vectors resulting from
the training.
The surface classiﬁcation accuracies achieved on the
FAMU-FSU Hopper are displayed in Table II. The trained
PWE classiﬁer was used to identify feature vectors F
1
,
F
2
= 2P, andF
3
by ﬁrst reducing the order toQ2R
h
using
Q =UF. Then the PWE comparesQ with the columns of
P and provides the terrain type most associated with the
sample.
As a result, the PWE classiﬁer identiﬁed pressure images
from each robot leg gait with accuracies over 98% (the
highest accuracy being 99.3%). The last row in Table II
displays the overall (e.g., average) classiﬁcation accuracy
of the PWE classiﬁer (i.e., the accuracy of identifying 861
terrain samples). Although the results are not displayed in
this paper, the PWE classiﬁer produced similar accuracies
when trained with terrain samples collected at gaits G
1
and
G
3
. The identiﬁcation attributes of the PWE classiﬁer trained
at gait G
2
, the intermittent gait, displayed the best results.
TABLE II
CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES
Tested Gait Accuracy
G
1
99.3%
G
2
99.1%
G
3
98.6%
Overall 99.0%
These ﬁndings insinuate that a PWE classiﬁer trained
with 20 pressure images, per terrain type using any leg
gaitG
i
produces near perfect identiﬁcation accuracies when
identifying terrains from any leg gait G
j
, where i 6= j.
Hence, PreSRS demonstrates the desired quality of capturing
terrain signatures independent of the robot dynamics.
Although not detailed in the paper, additional experiments
have shown that the classiﬁcation procedure is also load
independent. Due to the nature of the sensing array whose
output is proportional to the applied load, the effects of
a change in load from the load during training can be
accommodated by simply using a scaling factor. This method
holds if the training load is known and the modiﬁed load of
the vehicle is also known.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper describes the development and demonstration
of a proprioceptive approach to surface classiﬁcation that
relies on high-resolution pressure images measured with a
robot skin, called Pressure Sensitive Robot Skin (PreSRS).
PreSRS was constructed using human skin as a template.
The dermis layer consisted of a high-resolution pressure
sensing array, which has a pressure sensor density similar
to that of human skin. The compliant nature of human
skin was replicated using a felt type fabric, which emulates
the subcutaneous and epidermis layers. An outer layer of
hard silicon-rubber protected PreSRS against puncturing or
tearing.
A robot foot was developed for the FAMU-FSU Hopper,
enabling the robot skin to have maximal contact with the
terrain surface during the stance phases of motion. For
a given gait, surface classiﬁcation was accomplished by
extracting pressure images for training and classiﬁcation at a
ﬁxed stance time (i.e., the time after the foot initially impacts
the ground). This proved to be highly effective.
4727
Gait-independent terrain classiﬁcation was demonstrated
using the one-legged robot on four distinct terrains, operating
under three leg gaitsG
1
,G
2
, andG
3
of increasing velocity.
Even though the PWE classiﬁer was trained with data only
from the intermediate gaitG
2
, it was able to identify pressure
images recorded at all leg gaits, achieving a near perfect
(99.0%) overall accuracy. This approach enables tremendous
simpliﬁcation of the training process in comparison to exist-
ing proprioceptive approaches since the classiﬁer requires
terrain measurements from just one operating condition,
instead of many.
The surface classiﬁcation approach is based on the ob-
servation from [8], [11] that the magnitude of the spatial
frequency response of a surface constitutes a terrain signa-
ture. Principal Component Analysis was used to reduce the
feature vector dimensions to achieve fast classiﬁcation times.
The classiﬁer used in this research was a Parzen Windows
Estimator (PWE).
However, as discussed in [23], no one classiﬁer tends to
have the overall best performance. Hence, two classiﬁcation
algorithms: Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE) and
Support Vector Machines (SVM), were investigated; in addi-
tion to feature vectors derived from: 2D magnitude frequency
response and Gray-Level Co-occurrence Matrix (GLCM)
texture attributes [24]. All combinations of feature vector
and classiﬁer types produced similarly high accuracies and
low computational times. 1D magnitude frequency response
feature vectors and the PWE classiﬁer were chosen due
to these methods being the most practical to implement in
regards to online terrain classiﬁcation, which is one of the
next steps for this research.
In the future, this work will enable autonomous running
robots to modify their leg gaits in real-time to reﬂect changes
in the environment; improving speed, stability, and efﬁciency
of running in natural settings and enhancing the accuracy of
motion planning. In addition, this approach can be applied
to help the end effectors of robot manipulators to identify
surface types.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the U.S. Army Research
Laboratory under the Robotics Collaborative Technology
Alliance program, Cooperative Agreement W91NF-0-2-006.
REFERENCES
[1] Raibert and H. Marc, Legged Robots That Balance. Cambridge, MA,
USA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1986.
[2] U. Saranli, M. Buehler, and D. E. Koditschek, “RHex: A simple
and highly mobile hexapod robot,” International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 616–631, 2001.
[3] U. Asif and J. Iqbal, “An approach to stable walking over uneven
terrain using a reﬂex-based adaptive gait,” Journal of Control Science
and Engineering, 2011.
[4] B. Miller, B. Andrews, and J. Clark, “Improved stability of running
over unknown rough terrain via prescribed energy removal,” 12th
International Symposium on Experimental Robotics, 2010.
[5] S. Manjanna, G. Dudek, and P. Giguere, “Using gait change for terrain
sensing by robots,” in CRV ’13: Proceedings of the 2013 International
Conference on Computer and Robot Vision. IEEE Computer Society,
May 2013, pp. 16–22.
[6] E. Coyle, E. Collins, E. DuPont, D. Dang, H. Wang, R. Cooper, and
G. Grindle, “Vibration-based terrain classiﬁcation for electric powered
wheelchairs,” in In Proceedings of the Fourth IASTED International
Conference on Telehealth and Assistive Technologies, Baltimore, MD,
April 16-18 2008, pp. 139–144.
[7] C. C. Ward and K. Iagnemma, “Speed-independent vibration-based
terrain classiﬁcation for passenger vehicles,” Vehicle System Dynamics,
pp. 1–19, 2008.
[8] E. Dupont, E. Collins, E. Coyle, and R. Roberts, “Terrain classiﬁcation
using vibration sensors: Theory and methods,” in Mobile Robots: New
Research. Nova Science Publishers, Inc., 2010.
[9] P. Giguere, G. Dudek, C. Prahacs, and S. Saunderson, “Environment
identiﬁcation for a running robot using inertial and actuator cues,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Robotics and Automation,
Montreal, Canada, 2011.
[10] C. Ordonez, J. Shill, A. Johnsons, J. Clark, and E. Collins, “Terrain
identiﬁcation for RHex-type robots,” in Proceedings of the SPIE
Defense, Security, and Sensing Conference, Baltimore, MD, April 29
- May 3 2013.
[11] E. DuPont, C. Moore, E. Collins, and E. Coyle, “Frequency response
method for online terrain identiﬁcation in unmanned ground vehicles,”
Autonomous Robots, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 337–347, May 2008.
[12] A. B. Vallbo and R. S. Johansson, “Properties of cutaneous mechanore-
ceptors in the human hand related to touch sensation,” Human Neu-
robiology, vol. 3, pp. 3–14, 1984.
[13] Thonnard, Y . Bleyenheuft, and J. Louis, “Development of touch,”
Scholarpedia, vol. 4, no. 10, pp. 58–79, 2009.
[14] TekScan. (2013) Sensor map # 5051. 307 West First Street.
South Boston, MA. 02127-1309, USA. [Online]. Available:
http://www.tekscan.com/5051-pressure-sensor
[15] J. Pereira, J. Mansour, and B. Davis, “Dynamic measurement of the
viscoelastic properties of skin,” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 24,
no. 2, pp. 157–162, 1991.
[16] X. Liang and S. A. Boppart, “Biomechanical properties of in vivo
human skin from dynamic optical coherence elastography,” in IEEE
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 57, no. 4, April 2010,
pp. 953–959.
[17] M. Lee and H. Nicholls, “Review article tactile sensing for mecha-
tronics - a state of the art survey,” Mechatronics, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1
– 31, 1999.
[18] B. Andrews, B. Miller, J. Schmitt, and J. Clark, “Running over
unknown rough terrain with a one-legged planar robot,” Bioinspiration
& Biomimetics, vol. 6, pp. 1–15, June 2011.
[19] H. Elftman, “Dynamic structure of the human foot,” Artiﬁcal Limbs,
pp. 13–49, 1969.
[20] G. Kolger and M. Shorten, “Plantar pressure distribution during gait
in a subject without adipose tissue in the heel and ball of the foot,”
Proc. of the 5th Symp. on Footwear Biomechanics,, December 2001.
[21] K. Galloway, J. Clark, M. Yim, and D. Koditschek, “Experimental
investigations into role of passive variable compliant legs for dynamic
robotic locomotion,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, May 2011.
[22] E. Collins and E. Coyle, “Vibration-based terrain classiﬁcation using
surface proﬁle input frequency responses,” in In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Robotics and Automation, Pasadena, CA, May
19-23 2008, pp. 3276–3283.
[23] E. Coyle and E. Collins, “A comparison of classiﬁer performance for
vibration-based terrain classiﬁcation,” in 26th Army Science Confer-
ence, Orlando, FL, December 1-4 2008.
[24] R. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing. Prentice
Hall, 2002.
4728
