A Body Weight Support System Extension to Control Lateral Forces:
Realization and Validation
Dario Wyss, V olker Bartenbach, Andrew Pennycott, Robert Riener and Heike Vallery
Abstract— Body weight support systems are frequently used
as part of robotic gait training to provide unloading in
order to help subjects perform walking, but can also induce
stabilizing forces and render the task of maintaining balance
less challenging. In this paper, a two-dimensional body weight
support system extension is presented which reduces lateral
forces induced on the subject by means of linearly translating
the cable pulley according to lateral movements of the subject.
It is demonstrated that the system accurately tracks lateral
movements of the pelvis at different levels of vertical support
load and thereby lowers the induced lateral forces. The system
will be used in advanced robotic body weight supported
treadmill walking incorporating a balance training element.
I. INTRODUCTION
Regaining the ability to walk is a major focus of the
rehabilitation process in stroke survivors and patients suffer-
ing from a spinal cord injury. Being ambulatory is crucial
for accomplishing activities of daily living and therefore
contributes essentially to quality of life [1]. Body weight
supported treadmill training (BWSTT) is frequently used as
part of rehabilitation for patients suffering from spinal cord
injury or neurological diseases such as stroke. The body
weight of the subject is partially unloaded according to their
walking abilities and strength. Positive results have been
shown regarding the effectiveness of body weight supported
treadmill training for stroke patients [2] and for spinal cord
injured patients [3].
The training is often combined with a form of supporting
forces to move the neurologically impaired leg, which can
be provided manually by therapists or by powered orthoses.
Robotic assisted therapy can enhance the intensity and fre-
quency of training as it reduces the physical workload of the
therapists. On the other hand, a robotic device with limited
degrees of freedom restricts pelvis and trunk movements and
therefore can alter the gait kinematics [4]. These constraints
hinder lateral movement - an important element underlying
the control of balance during walking [5] - and therefore can
limit the scope of and reduce the challenge of the training
[6].
Most body weight support systems (BWS) are realized
with a cable system which is connected to a harness worn
by the subject. The cable is guided by a passive or active
All authors are with the Sensory-Motor Systems Lab, Institute of Robotics
and Intelligent Systems, ETH Zurich. Dario Wyss and Robert Riener are also
with the Spinal Cord Injury Center, University Hospital Balgrist, University
of Zurich. Andrew Pennycott is also with the Human Robotics Group, De-
partment of Bioengineering, Imperial College London. Heike Vallery is also
with the BioMechanical Engineering Department, Faculty of Mechanical
Engineering, Technical University of Delft. dario.wyss@hest.ethz.ch
weight unloading system over an overhead mounted deﬂec-
tion pulley to the subject. An example of a commercially
available body weight support system is the Lokolift [7]. The
scope of body weight supported gait training has recently
been expanded to large workspace overground walking with
the development of the ZeroG (Bioness, Inc., Valencia, CA,
U.S.), which follows the subject in the walking direction by
means of a trolley that runs on a rail and contains a pulley
mechanism with a series elastic actuator to unload the subject
[8], and with the development of the FLOAT (Lutz Medical
Engineering, Switzerland), which allows transparent 3D sup-
port during overground gait, by means of four actuators and
moving deﬂection units on two rails [9].
Preliminary experiments [10] indicate that most of the
currently available body weight support systems with a ﬁxed
pulley system impose lateral forces on the subject. These
forces tend to pull the subject back towards the centerline
as shown in Fig. 1 and thus cause a stabilising effect, which
may reduce the challenge of the dynamic balance control
task.
Lateral
movement
Pulley
Cable tension
Treadmill
Fig. 1: Principle problem with missing lateral DoF.
This paper presents an extension to body weight support
systems incorporating an additional degree of freedom (DoF)
to minimize these lateral forces. The device hardware and
validation of its performance is shown. Finally, a comparison
between a conventional, ﬁxed BWS system and one equipped
with the new extension is made.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 328
II. BACKGROUND
A new treadmill-based gait rehabilitation system has been
developed which focuses on balance aspects and therefore
enables lateral weight shift of the subject. This modular sys-
tem consists of several components with the core element of
a new pelvis module, which allows for lateral displacement
of the human pelvis. As described in section I, there is a need
for an actuated BWS in order to avoid the stabilising effects
of the induced lateral forces in the supporting cable. The
main application of the new BWS will be in the context of
the new gait rehabilitation device. To clarify the interaction
between the two components, the pelvis module is simpliﬁed
as a linear actuator to support the lateral movement of the
pelvis, as depicted in Fig. 2.
Linear
actuator
Treadmill
Fig. 2: The linear actuator supports the natural horizontal
weight-shifting movement of the pelvis and emulates the
pelvis module of the complete BWSTT platform.
III. CONCEPT AND MODEL
The main function of the body weight support extension
is to laterally translate the main pulley according to pelvic
movements using a linear actuator
1
. However, a lateral
deviation of the pulley would alter the cable length of the
main BWS which would induce large forces on the pulley.
Therefore, a design is proposed that cancels out the static
forces and compensates for changes in cable length. The
actuator force needed is small as it only compensates for
friction effects and inertia. A system of pulleys (Fig. 3) is
used to ensure that changes in the overall cable length in
response to lateral movements of the main pulley are kept
to a minimum. Further details of the concept, including a
mathematical model and a simulation study of the system,
are presented in [11].
In comparable applications such as cranes with trolleys,
another approach is often used, namely a free hanging pulley.
1
Two linear actuators are used: the ﬁrst mimics the pelvis module for the
experiments of this study (Fig. 2, 6 and 9) while the second is a component
of the presented 2D BWS (Fig. 3 and 4).
Cable leading to
harness attachment
Linear actuator
Main pulley system
Support pulley system
Main body weight
support hardware
Trolley 1
Trolley 2
y
Fig. 3: Schematic of BWS extension.
The concept presented here was chosen because uncon-
trollable degrees of freedom should be avoided. Another
advantage is the compatibility with existing body weight
support systems, as the extension does not alter the forces
of the main support system. In addition, it will be possible
to use the system to command nonzero lateral forces. This
could be useful to render subject-speciﬁc balance training
environments (e.g. stabilizing or destabilizing).
IV. HARDWARE AND SENSOR IMPLEMENTATION
The components of the new BWS extension - illustrated
in Fig. 4 - are mounted on a plate that is rigidly connected to
the frame of the BWS system. The pulleys are manufactured
from polyamid and are each equipped with two low friction
ball bearings. The moveable pulley units are mounted on the
trolley of a linear guideway (Hiwin R ). The trolley of the
ﬁrst pulley system is actuated by a ball screw (with a lead
of 2 mm) and electric motor (Maxon R RE40). The small
lead was chosen in order to make an additional transmission
superﬂuous.
Sensing of the lateral pulley position is realized by an
encoder on the motor shaft and a linear potentiometer for
redundancy and ease of initialization. The support pulley
system is driven by a length stable belt and guided over
crowned pulleys for self-centering. The maximal achievable
force and speed of the linear unit are 565 N and 0.35 m/s,
respectively, while the maximal lateral amplitude of the
lateral pulley position is 0.1 m.
V. CONTROL SYSTEM
The lateral position of the new BWS extension, y, is
position controlled using a simple proportional derivative
(PD) controller, shown in Fig. 5; the parameters of the PD
controller were tuned manually. The controller produces,
via a motor torque, an actuator force, F
a
, based on the
error, e, between the reference (y
ref
) and actual (y) lateral
displacements.
This arrangement was chosen since the pelvis module has
the task of supporting and controlling the lateral movement
of the human and the idea behind the control system of
the BWS in standard training mode is to minimize the
329
Attachment
to person
Linear actuator
Main pulley
system
Support pulley
system
Potentiometer
y
Fig. 4: The mechanical implementation of the pulley system.
+
-
y
ref y
e
F
a PD
controller
BWS
Dynamics
F
load
Fig. 5: The position control system of the lateral degree of
freedom of the BWS system.
relative lateral position between the pelvis and BWS cable
attachment point, and therefore, the unintended lateral forces
which are induced by this relative displacement.
Currently, there are two control modes implemented. In
the ﬁrst control mode, the desired position of the BWS is
given by the actual measured lateral position of the pelvis
module. In this way, the BWS tracks the lateral position of
the pelvis module (and thus also the lateral position of the
subject). This mode will be applied when the impedance of
the lateral control of the pelvis module is low, giving the
human subject a high degree of inﬂuence on their lateral
position.
In the second control mode, the desired position for the
control system of the BWS is directly given by the desired
trajectory of the pelvis module. In this way, the movement
of the two modules should be better synchronized and the
tracking error and thus the lateral disturbing forces should
be minimized. This mode is intended to be used when the
impedance of the lateral pelvis guidance is high; in this case,
the actual trajectory of the human pelvis should be tightly
controlled to a reference trajectory.
Concerning other applications, the linear correlation of the
displacement/angle and the disturbing lateral force provides
the possibility of actually using the BWS to induce deﬁned
disturbing or stabilizing forces on the human subject. This
could be used in the future for applications such as balance
training in which perturbations are applied to the subject
during walking to increase the challenge of maintaining
balance.
As a safety feature, virtual ‘walls’ are implemented at the
end points of the lateral range of motion. These provide an
additional assisting component and secure against excessive
lateral movements (e.g. when a subject is stumbling and
in danger of falling to one side). Other safety features are
current limits for the motors, emergency stop buttons for both
the subject and operator, and the mechanical end-stops of the
device (Fig. 4) which limit the extent of lateral movement.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
In order to evaluate the concept and implementation of
the system, two experiments were conducted to answer the
following questions:
1) Does the pulley mechanism function in the intended
way such that the supportive load for the subject does
not affect the lateral system behavior (e.g. due to
friction effects)?
2) Does the additional degree of freedom of the BWS
system succeed in reducing the induced lateral forces?
A. Inﬂuence of Attached Mass on System Behavior
As discussed in section III, the force from the attached
mass of the person should be canceled out within the pulley
mechanism and therefore should not unduly inﬂuence the
system’s lateral behavior. To evaluate whether the friction
and other effects caused by the attached load alter the me-
chanical behavior, the BWS was set to a sinusoidal trajectory
(6 cm amplitude) and three different masses (5 kg, 25 kg and
45 kg) were attached to the cable, as shown in Fig. 6.
m
Linear
actuator
F
load
y
Fig. 6: The experimental setup to evaluate the system behav-
ior under different loading conditions.
This range was chosen as it represents realistic loads
for body weight supported treadmill training: 45 kg would
represent 50% support for a 90 kg person. To ensure that
the additional load is only applied in a vertical (negative y-
direction) and that no (or very low) dynamic lateral forces
are applied to the BWS, the added masses were additionally
guided by a linear actuator that moved them in a lateral
direction. The ﬁxation utilized ensured that no vertical forces
were transferred to this pelvic lateral guidance system. The
linear actuator concept is applied here in order to simulate the
intended application in which all the lateral forces between
the subject and the robot should be transferred to the pelvis
module of the gait rehabilitation system.
330
Fig. 7 compares the desired and actual sinusoidal trajecto-
ries for the different loads. It can be seen that there is almost
no difference in the tracking performance of the position
control system for the three different loads attached to the
BWS.
Time [s]
y [m]
0 2 4 6 8 10
-0.06
-0.03
0
0.03
0.06
(a) 5 kg load
Time [s]
y [m]
0 2 4 6 8 10
-0.06
-0.03
0
0.03
0.06
(b) 25 kg load
Time [s]
y [m]
0 2 4 6 8 10
-0.06
-0.03
0
0.03
0.06
(c) 45 kg load
Fig. 7: The desired sinusoidal trajectory compared to the
actual recorded trajectories with three different loads (5kg,
25 kg and 45 kg) attached to the BWS. Dotted and solid lines
represent the reference and actual positions, respectively.
As an additional indicator of whether the system behavior
is altered by the different levels of supported mass, the
control outputs of the position control were recorded for the
three different load cases and then compared. Time histories
are shown in Fig. 8. The root mean square force output is
increased by around 16% when the attached load is increased
from 5 kg to 45 kg.
Time [s]
Motor torque [mNm]
0 2 4 6 8 10
-50
-25
0
25
50
Fig. 8: Motor torque of the control system for the three
different load cases. Solid, dotted and dashed lines represent
loading at 5 kg, 25 kg and 45 kg, respectively.
B. Inﬂuence of the Lateral DoF on the Disturbing Forces
In order to answer the second question concerning whether
the new lateral degree of freedom of the BWS system
effectively helps to reduce the disturbing lateral reaction
forces, an experiment was conducted to measure this force.
Firstly, the experiment was conducted with a locked DoF,
while in the latter phases, the lateral DoF was unlocked and
the control system activated in two different modes. There
were thus three different settings:
1) Lateral DoF locked;
2) Lateral DoF permitted, ﬁrst control mode;
3) Lateral DoF permitted, second control mode.
The setup of the experiment is illustrated in Fig. 9. The
cable of the BWS was attached to a 6 DoF force sensor
that in turn was attached to an additional linear actuator that
could move laterally (with all other DoFs ﬁxed). The vertical
distance between the force sensor and the attachment point
was approximately 0.75 m, a height that represents a realistic
value in the setup. During the tests, the linear actuator moved
the added mass in a sinusoidal pattern with an amplitude of
6 cm.
Linear
actuator
Force
sensor
(a) 2D BWS locked
Linear
actuator
Force
sensor
(b) 2D BWS active
Fig. 9: Experimental setup for the experiments on the dis-
turbing forces, with the lateral DoF of the BWS blocked
(left) and active (right).
The resulting forces were recorded (no torques were
transmitted due to the mechanical interface to the sensor)
and low pass ﬁltered with a 20 Hz cutoff frequency. Fig.
10 shows the lateral forces that were measured under the
three different settings. It can be seen that the lateral degree
of freedom with the feedback controller greatly reduces the
induced lateral forces.
The root mean square (RMS) results are summarized
in Table I. The RMS values are reduced by around 80%
from condition 1 to condition 2 and by another 40% from
condition 2 to condition 3.
The correlation between the lateral force and the lateral
displacement between the cable attachment point at the BWS
and the lateral position of the force sensor is shown in Fig.
11. It can be seen that the correlation is fairly linear over
the analyzed range of motion and that hysteresis is low.
This shows that in addition to the reduction in the lateral
disturbance, the BWS extension presented in this paper could
be used to apply intended stabilizing or disturbing forces, for
example in a stand-alone application without the additional
331
Time [s]
Lateral force [N]
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
-8
-4
0
4
8
BWS locked
BWS active
Mode 1
BWS active
Mode 2
Fig. 10: Measured lateral forces under different control
settings, with the lateral DoF was blocked (left-hand section),
unlocked (middle section) and position control set to the
tracking mode, and the trajectory of the BWS synchronized
with that of the linear actuator (right-hand section).
modules (i.e. the robotic orthosis device) of the complete
gait rehabilitation system.
Condition RMS [N] Amplitude [N]
1 5.8 8.5
2 1.25 2
3 0.71 1.5
TABLE I: Lateral forces (RMS and amplitude) for the three
different conditions.
Tests will shortly be conducted to evaluate the perfor-
mance when human subjects are supported by the device and
walking at different speeds. This will introduce additional
challenges such as a variation in vertical load and a more
complex pattern of lateral movement.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
An extension for body weight support systems which
reduces lateral stabilizing forces through tracking lateral
movements of the subject’s pelvis has been designed, con-
structed and tested. The system can accurately follow a
reference sinusoidal lateral displacement under various levels
of vertical supporting force. The body weight support system
extension substantially reduces the induced lateral forces
while effects on the vertical support forces are kept to a
minimum. The system will be applied to advanced body
weight supported treadmill training in which subjects are
required to actively maintain their balance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was developed under funding from the Com-
mission for Technology and Innovation (CTI) of Switzerland.
REFERENCES
[1] J. M. Guralnik, A. Z. LaCroix, R. D. Abbott, L. F. Berkman,
S. Satterﬁeld, D. A. Evans, and R. B. Wallace, “Maintaining mobility
in late life. i. demographic characteristics and chronic conditions,”
American Journal of Epidemiology, vol. 137, no. 8, pp. 845–857, 1993.
Lateral displacement, y [m]
Lateral force [N]
-0.06 -0.04 -0.02 0 0.02 0.04 0.06
-8
-4
0
4
8
Fig. 11: The lateral forces over the lateral displacement
between the attachment point of the rope at the BWS and
the force sensor.
[2] S. Hesse, C. Bertelt, A. Schaffrin, M. Malezic, and K. Mauritz,
“Restoration of gait in nonambulatory hemiparetic patients by tread-
mill training with partial body-weight support,” Archives of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation, vol. 75, no. 10, pp. 1087–1093, 1994.
[3] B. Dobkin, D. Apple, H. Barbeau, M. Basso, A. Behrman, D. De-
forge, J. Ditunno, G. Dudley, R. Elashoff, and L. Fugate, “Methods
for a randomized trial of weight-supported treadmill training versus
conventional training for walking during inpatient rehabilitation after
incomplete traumatic spinal cord injury,” Neurorehabilitation and
Neural Repair, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 153–167, 2003.
[4] J. Hidler, W. Wisman, and N. Neckel, “Kinematic trajectories while
walking within the lokomat robotic gait-orthosis,” Clinical Biomechan-
ics, vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1251–1259, 2008.
[5] C. Bauby and A. Kuo, “Active control of lateral balance in human
walking,” Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 33, no. 11, pp. 1433–1440,
2000.
[6] A. Pennycott, D. Wyss, H. Vallery, V . Klamroth-Marganska, R. Riener,
et al., “Towards more effective robotic gait training for stroke reha-
bilitation: a review,” Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation,
vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2012.
[7] M. Frey, G. Colombo, M. Vaglio, R. Bucher, M. Jorg, and R. Riener,
“A novel mechatronic body weight support system,” Neural Systems
and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 14, no. 3,
pp. 311–321, 2006.
[8] J. Hidler, D. Brennan, I. Black, D. Nochols, K. Brady, and T. Nef,
“ZeroG: Overground gait and balance training system,” Journal of
Rehabilitation Research and Development, vol. 48, pp. 287–289, 2011.
[9] H. Vallery, P. Lutz, J. von Zitzewitz, G. Rauter, M. Fritschi, C. Ever-
arts, R. Ronsse, A. Curt, and M. Bolliger, “Multidirectional transparent
support for overground gait training,” in Rehabilitation Robotics
(ICORR), 2013 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1–5, IEEE,
2013.
[10] A. Pennycott, D. Wyss, H. Vallery, and R. Riener, “Effects of added
inertia and body weight support on lateral balance control during walk-
ing,” in Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2011 IEEE International
Conference on, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2011.
[11] A. Pennycott, H. Vallery, D. Wyss, M. Spindler, A. Dewarrat, and
R. Riener, “A novel body weight support system extension: initial
concept and simulation study,” in Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR),
2013 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1–5, IEEE, 2013.
332
