Area of Acceptance for 3D Self-Aligning Robotic Connectors: Concepts,
Metrics, and Designs
Nick Eckenstein and Mark Yim
Abstract— Alignment of module connectors is a crucial
component of self-reconﬁguration in modular robotics. Accom-
plishing this process using passive mechanical geometry saves
resources such as space and power for the modular robot. We
present concepts for evaluation of these geometries as well as
a new 3D geometry, the 3D X-Face. For comparing different
connectors independent of the rest of the robot, ﬁgures of merit
are presented which are based on the ability for connectors
to mate in the presence of position and orientation errors
(offsets). Figures of merit for many current connectors are
presented. The 3D X-Face alignment behavior is simulated in
Gazebo over several sets of initial conditions to estimate the
full area of acceptance, and the connector is tested on a CKBot
robotic platform. For the situation without rotation, results
indicate a 27% improvement over current gendered connectors
and a 467% over ungendered connectors. The 3D X-Face is
further simulated over a full ﬁve-dimensional set and metrics
are estimated on that set.
I. INTRODUCTION
Modular self-reconﬁgurable robot systems have been de-
veloping for several decades with many dozens of hardware
systems currently proposed [1]. These systems can be cat-
egorized in to three classes based on their reconﬁguration
basis: lattice - where modules nominally sit on a lattice
and reconﬁguration occurs between neighbors, chain - where
modules make and break chains, and mobile based recon-
ﬁguration - where modules move around the environment
and dock independently. Docking refers to connecting and
disconnecting of two modules in a given system. The docking
elements of a self-reconﬁgurable system provide the key
functionality that makes these systems self-reconﬁgurable.
The robustness of the docking process is often key to
automatic reconﬁguration. Errors in positioning and align-
ment for proper docking can occur from a variety of sources
depending on the class of reconﬁguration. Lattice-based
systems tend to have the smallest amount of positional error
since modules only reconﬁgure with neighbors. However,
compliance between neighbors can lead to deformation and
positional errors. Chain-based systems form arbitrarily long
chains in which positional errors occur at each joint. Mobile
based systems have to contend with deformations and irregu-
larities in the environment. These errors can be compensated
for either by active positioning - as would be found in chain
and mobile systems, or with passive chamfer-like mechanical
features which allow modules to slide into position. The latter
is the main focus for this paper.
Section I introduces background and important terms.
Section II explains what is meant by area of acceptance as it
pertains to the examination of three-dimensional connector
Nick Eckenstein and Mark Yim, are from the GRASP Lab and Depart-
ment of Mechanical Engineering and Applied Mechanics, at the Univ. of
Pennsylvania, email: fneck,yimg @ seas.upenn.edu.
Fig. 1: Alignment test setup. Overhead arm composed of
CKBots. Jig aids in setting exact position.
alignment. Section III describes a ﬁgure of merit for a self-
aligning connector. Section IV reviews and compares state-
of-the-art designs with the X-Face design. Section V presents
details of the simulation environment used for testing. The
results of the simulation and prototype testing are presented
in sections VI and VII respectively.
A. Background
We introduced the concept of Area of Acceptance (AA)
in the previous work on the 2D X-Face. Area of acceptance
is deﬁned as ’the range of possible starting conditions for
which mating will be successful’ [2]. More generally, given
some approach condition and pair of docking objects, the
AA is the set of all initial poses (relative to each other) that
result in intimate alignment of the two parts.
Few connector designs of this type have been evaluated
extensively for acceptance range. Nilsson [3] mathematically
determined a bound on self-alignable offsets for 2D mechan-
ical connectors with the restriction that they be deﬁnable as
a function. He applied this notion of self-alignable offsets
to his characterization of the DRAGON connector [4] and
determined its maximum offsets individually in all relevant
degrees of freedom (DOF) (=5 in positional offsets [x,y],
45°in rotational offsets [roll, pitch, yaw]). The X-Claw
[5] was an active connector which had its error tolerance
characterised - in (x,y,z) in combination, and (roll, pitch,
yaw) individually. By utilizing multiple layers, the 2D X-
Face accomplished a 200% increase in positional offset
AA for 2D connectors over the bound on ungendered 2D
connectors determined by Nilsson. Signiﬁcant increases in
combined position-orientation AA were also shown.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1227
II. AREA OF ACCEPTANCE
We can classify AA into different types with respect to
the DOFs of one docking element relative to the other. The
DOF are either constrained, unconstrained, or the approach
DOF. In the 2D X-Face, for example, the docking elements
are constrained to be in a plane, and one face has three
DOFs relative to the other (SE(2) two of position and
one of orientation). However, one of those positional DOFs
include a mating direction. That DOF can be considered to
be constrained while the other two are able to move freely,
albeit pseudo-statically (to simplify analysis). In the more
general 3D case, one face has six DOFs relative to the
other (SE(3)) with one DOF encompassing the approach.
While this approach DOF is typically considered to be a
positional DOF, it could be any that lead to lower kinematic
pair relationships including screws. The other ﬁve DOFs are
unconstrained. Being constrained in this case means that
those DOFs will always be perfectly aligned.
In some cases, where the faces have a symmetry (e.g. a
round peg, in round hole) one or more DOF is in a “don’t
care” state. Whereas the end mating condition in all other
cases has the state of all DOFs deﬁned, this one has the other
symmetric DOFs make no functional difference and so do
not need to match to satisfactorily mate.
In this work, we consider the SE(3) case with the
approach DOF a position one which we deﬁne as the z-
direction. The approach dimension is excluded from the AA
as it does not affect acceptance behavior.
A. Zero Rotation Area of Acceptance
When all orientation DOF are constrained, we call the set
of positions that align successfully the Zero Rotation Area
of Acceptance (ZRAA). In the 2D case, this is equivalent
to Nilsson’s self-alignable offsets [3] as a simple bound,
but in the SE(3) case it represents a two-dimensional set
of points (over x and y in the plane). This gives us a
relatively simple, quick picture of the acceptance potential
of the given connector. Some diagrams of this ZRAA are
shown in Figure 2, and were determined analytically based
on given dimensions of the connectors in question obtained
from the literature.
System Normalized ZRAA Sum
GENFA Connector [7] 0.00353
Polybot [8] 0.00503
M-TRAN III [9] 0.00592
JHU [10] 0.00592
I-Cubes* [11] 0.0187
CONRO* [12] 0.0425
Vacuubes [13] 0.0555
X-CLAW [5] 0.0649
ACOR(unpaired) [14] 0.0711
SINGO Connector [6] 0.306
DRAGON [4] 0.353
amour [15] 1.57
3D X-Face
o
2.00
* Estimated ZRAA values.
o
The 3D X-Face is not a full connector. The addition of attachment
capabilities will likely have some effect on the metric
TABLE I: Table of ZRAA Sum metrics, normalized relative
to characteristic length of the face.
B. Full Area of Acceptance
The full AA is the AA given no exclusion of possible
starting conditions and no constraints. For 2D connectors the
full AA is two-dimensional (x and ). For 3D connectors it
is ﬁve-dimensional (x,y,pitch,roll,yaw). In the most general
case, it is difﬁcult to develop an analytical model to estimate
AA, so empirical methods can be used. However, we have
found the high dimensionality makes it costly to test or
simulate exhaustively at high resolutions.
C. Other Areas of Acceptance
In order to effectively visualize the full AA without
exhaustively exploring the ﬁve dimensional space, we take
two dimensional slices. These slices are obtained by starting
with all DOFs aligned and unconstrained, except the two
being explored. Those two are sampled at high resolution to
obtain an intuitive 2D plot of the AA for those DOFs.
These two dimensional subsets we call the X-Y , X-Roll,
X-Pitch, and X-Yaw Areas of Acceptance (Section VI). The
X-Roll Area of Acceptance is the subset of the Full AA with
initial offsets in the x and roll dimensions. The others are
similarly named.
III. FIGURE OF MERIT
In order to compare the ability for docking geometries
to handle misalignment, we need a metric; ideally, a single
ﬁgure of merit. Since connectors can be of different size, the
linear dimensions are normalized to the connector size.
A. Sum Metric
The Sum metric is found by simply adding up the total
area that is accepted. This gives a simple ﬁgure of merit of
all possible conﬁgurations without giving any information as
to the shape of this area. This is used in Table I, and gives
a comparison for the ZRAA, where concavities are unlikely
to occur and shapes are typically not complex. For example,
the ZRAA for the SINGO connector, seen in Figure 2, takes
up a sizeable area, but is not as robust to high error solely
in x or solely in y. However, it has been our experience with
the 2D X-Face that when orientation offsets are introduced
irregular shapes occur. Additionally, we may ﬁnd in some
instances that while the sum metric for a particular connector
is reasonably high, it could be highly robust to errors in
one dimension, but less robust in another. In order to better
measure the connector acceptance in a way that is more
realistic with respect to characteristic robot error, we have
developed an alternative ﬁgure of merit that reﬂects a range
robust to errors in each dimension.
B. Oriented N-Cube Metric
Typically, each dimension has some error ranges which
can be expected based on the speciﬁc robotic platform. One
would like to match the positioning error with the AA.
Concavities and narrow areas or holes in an AA can limit
this matching. The Oriented N-Cube Metric, as a ﬁgure of
merit is more likely able to match with errors that typically
are deﬁned as distances from an ideal position/orientation. It
is deﬁned to be a measure of the AA found by the edge
size (characteristic length) of the largest axis-oriented N-
Cube which ﬁts within the normalized AA. An N-Cube is a
1228
ZeroNRotationNAreaNofNAcceptanceNw6
Com parisonNtoNLDNX7Face
Circum scribedN
ProbeNandNDrogue
D
SINGON
Cross7Section
D
Cross7SectionN
Comparison
Circum scribedN
DRAGONNCross7Section
D
D
InscribedN
ProbeNandNDrogue
DRAGONNRenderingNCourtesy
NMartinNNilsson5NSICS
Cone6ProbeNandNDrogue
RenderingsN
AndNResults
8
LDNX7FaceNAA:N8D
Circum scribedNCone6P. DNAA:)0VTD
8
DRAGONNAA:N(0LVLD
8
SINGONAA:N(0L(hN:orN86T+D
8N
InscribedNCone6P. DNAA:(0T8VD
8
DRAGON
SINGO
Inscribed
P.D
Circumscribed
P.D
Circum scribedN
ProbeNandNDrogue
AA
LDN
X7FaceNAA
D
D
LDNX7Face
AA
DRAGONNAA
AreaNofNAcceptanceN
Comparison
InscribedN
ProbeNandNDrogue
AA
D
LDNX7Face
AA
LDNX7Face
AA
SINGONAA
D
X7FaceNandNLockingNX7Face
Front6RearNView
Left6RightNView
TopNView
SINGO Data from [6]
Fig. 2: Comparison of ZRAAs. The leftmost column compares ZRAAs, and the middle column compares connector cross-
sections viewed from the approach direction. The large diamond shape is the ZRAA for the 3D X-Face, and other shapes
correspond to the respective connectors.
1229
cubic shape existing in N dimensions. We only consider axis-
oriented N-Cubes, meaning that its edges are parallel to the
(x,y,...) axes. For the metric we ﬁnd the largest axis-oriented
N-Cube which can ﬁt fully within the normalized AA;
that is, the largest N-Cube which contains only offsets that
result in successful alignment. This N-Cube has a diameter
(characteristic length) which is our single-number metric.
The normalized AA is the AA with each dimension divided
by its maximum feasible limits. For angular offsets this will
typically be /2 to/2, and for positional offsets it will be
the maximum offset before connectors are no longer touch-
ing. So, on a connector with maximum positional offset of 5
mm and maximum angular offset of /2 radians, the offset
(2mm,/4 radians) would become (0.4,0.5). Normalizing in
this fashion allows us to compare angular and positional
offsets and deﬁne an N-cube with unit-less measures.
The N-cube can be found mathematically; if you are
sampling numerically, as we are in simulation, it is sufﬁcient
to assign each successfully docked point a number corre-
sponding to the largest N-cube of successful points around
it and take the maximum. Analytically the problem is more
difﬁcult and beyond the scope of this paper.
We can see in Fig. 2 that the largest oriented N-Cube (or
square, in the case of the ZRAA) for the DRAGON or Probe
and Drogue would be nearly the same area as the full sum
(as the square inscribed in the circular AA), but only a small
square can ﬁt in the center of the SINGO ZRAA due to the
highly concave ’X’ shape.
IV. THREE-DIMENSIONAL CONNECTOR DESIGNS
In this section we detail three designs that represent
the state-of-the-art with respect to self-aligning mechanical
connectors and follow with a new design.
A. Existing Designs
1) Cone/Probe-and-Drogue: The ﬁrst modular robot sys-
tem to use a self-aligning docking connector is the cone-
shaped dock on CEBOT [16], which was a simple cone-
and-funnel alignment system. Other systems have used this
connector shape since then, including the AMOUR under-
water system [15], which called it a probe-and-drogue shape
since it in fact had a ’probe’ end that would be latched into
the receptacle on the adjoining module. This connector is
’gendered’ since it has a male face that must mate with the
female face. This connector does not align offsets in the
’yaw’ direction; that is, around the axis of the face.
2) Polybot: Polybot [8] used a self-aligning connector to
bridge the gap over ﬁne resolutions where sensing failed, e.g.
at a chain end where errors accumulate. As a result, the 4
pin/hole pairs on each face cover a very small area compared
to the face size (4mm pin diameter, 50mm face width). This
connector is hermaphroditic containing both male and female
parts, allowing faces to connect to any other face.
3) DRAGON Connector: Nilsson [4] was the ﬁrst to use
the geometry of the connector as a design feature. The
DRAGON connector was designed for high-strength, high-
acceptance applications, which are important for modular
robotic applications as the system grows. Nilsson charac-
terizes the offsets the connector is capable of correcting,
both linear and angular (15mm==5 linearly and 45 deg
angular). The DRAGON connector uses 4 cone-funnel pairs,
alternating in a circle, with the latch on an outer ring.
4) Other Connectors: Other connectors have been exam-
ined, although there is not room to compare the full diagrams
here. These systems are compared by ZRAA in Table I. The
values in this table were determined by measurements given
on the alignment geometries either in the text or in ﬁgures.
Passive mechanisms are analyzed by the areas of the two
aligning connector components, and active mechanisms from
correction ranges given in the text.
Many modular systems are not included because they are
not explicitly comparable; either the connection mechanism
is not 3D, or they rely on magnetic forces to align. The sys-
tems in the table utilize either active or passive mechanical
forces to align the modules for docking. Connectors utilizing
active mechanisms do so as a combination alignment and at-
tachment mechanism. Systems which use passive alignment
(Cone, Polybot, DRAGON, X-Face) save a certain amount
of design resources but still require latching mechanisms.
Sometimes these latching mechanisms can be added with
minimal effect on the area of acceptance, as in amour [15]
but it still can cause constraints on the shape and dimensions.
Also worth noting are the interesting alignment geometries
on many of Lipson’s robots [13] [17]. These are mechanical
alignment faces which augment either a pressure-driven or
magnetic alignment force. When these are evaluated within
the context of the paper, we evaluate only the alignment
geometry, not the other forces.
B. New X-Face Designs
1) 3D X-Face: Based on on our previous geometry de-
sign, the X-Face [2], we have designed a geometry that
expands the design advantages of the X-Face geometry for
3D modular robotics applications. This design was found by
an attempt to ﬁnd a continuous representation of the 2D X-
Face; viewed from the side, we can still see that one high
point is at the front-left or front-right, and the other is at
the back-right or back-left respectively. Thus the ’front’ and
’back’ planes of the connector are geometrically similar to
the two layers of the 2D X-Face as can been seen in Fig. 2.
If we think of the design as a function over a 2D plane, it
appears as a function with a ’saddle’ point, two minima, and
two maxima. The basic geometry of the 3D X-Face connector
can be seen in Figure 2. We do not have the advantage we
had on the original X-Face design of an extra dimension to
be utilized, but by extending the aligning faces along the
full length of the sides we improve the effective AA of the
connector, as we will show. This design has the advantage of
being ungendered (that is, the docking faces have identical
geometry), which helps with the operational ﬂexibility of
any resulting modular system by making every site eligible
for docking. The design corrects for offsets in the ’yaw’
direction; that is, the rotational DOF about the direction of
facing. For the entirety of this paper, we use the X-Face
geometry which has an angle of

12
, that is,
H
D
= sin

12
.
We must note that the 3D X-Face is not yet a true
connector. Without the addition of a means of physical con-
nection it represents only an alignment geometry. Physical
connections of any type require design considerations which
might interfere with the ability to obtain an ideal geometry.
1230
So while we do not consider it a precisely ’fair’ comparison
to other full connectors, we believe it nonetheless represents
an advancement in alignment geometries over the existing
literature.
We show that the 3D X-Face has ZRAA Sum of 2.0,
while the next highest is the circumscribed Probe and Drogue
with 1.57. This represents a 27% increase over the the best
existing gendered design. The ungendered connector with
the greatest ZRAA Sum is the DRAGON connector with
0.353, which we improve on by 467%. Using the Oriented
N-Cube Metric, the ZRAA is measured as 1.0, equivalent
to the Circumscribed Probe and Drogue. The DRAGON
measured using the same metric is 0.474, so the X-Face
3D still represents an improvement of 111% for ungendered
designs in this metric.
2) Locking 3D X-Face: The last design we will be com-
paring AA is the Locking X-Face geometry, which is a
variant on the X-Face. The Locking X-Face, seen in Fig.
2, is more robust to disturbance once connected since the
addition of a lip feature at the saddle point prevents the
connectors from coming apart in any direction other than the
facing direction. Speciﬁcally, this lip feature is the addition
of a vertical (z-oriented) mating face at the center lines along
each edge, meeting at the saddle point.
Twisting forces about z on the 3D X-Face without the
locking feature causes the two faces to separate in the z
direction. The speed of this separation is linear with the
tangent of the normal of an 3D X-Face surface to z-axis
(note that all four faces have the same value). In the case
where the 3D X-face is ﬂat, the tangent is 0. In this case,
rotations about the z-axis yield no separation motion, yet
they also yield no self-alignment behavior. When the surface
normals are perpendicular to the z-axis, the tangent is inﬁnite,
and so are the separation velocities. This also corresponds to
requiring inﬁnite force (up to material strength properties).
The Locking 3D X-Face exploits this principle by adding
vertical faces in a lip feature.
Unfortunately the lip feature introduces the possibility of
jamming due to angular misalignments or foreign material.
To combat the disadvantage, the mating face of this lip
feature can be given a ’draft angle’ as one would in mold
making. Adding a draft angle reduces the locking force from
inﬁnite, but can help prevent total failure due to dirt or other
foreign object and reduce the possibility of jamming.
From a design standpoint, the locking feature also means
we only have to add features to control that one DOF if
we wish to ensure rigid connection once the connectors are
docked successfully.
V. SIMULATION
A. Simulation Environment
Since we are now working in SE(3), the Full AA has
ﬁve dimensions . To evaluate and verify the X-Face design’s
AA, we utilize the Gazebo dynamic simulation environment.
Gazebo was chosen because it is relatively easy to set up and
repeat a simulation, and because it is capable of changing
physics parameters relatively easily. This will be important
for future work as we examine more of the dynamic and
design space in which these connection problems occur.
Gazebo also has multiple tools that can we use to ensure
that the simulation’s dynamic parameters (i.e. center of mass,
inertia matrix) are correctly set by seeing it directly in the
simulation. The default ODE physics engine was used for
the simulations in this paper.
Set up of the parameters, models and environment are
done by creating a standard Gazebo world ﬁle. A custom
C++ plugin for Gazebo logs the results from repeating the
simulation with different offsets. Alignment or failure to
align was determined by measuring the distance between the
’saddle points’ of the two connector models. If this distance
became less than a small threshold the parts are recorded as
’aligned’, but if they become too far apart (more than the
width of the connector) or if the simulation runs unusually
long, the parts have ’failed to align’. To ease computation,
the simulation was made essentially quasi-static with large
global damping. Friction and coefﬁcient of restitution are set
to zero. While not a realistic assumption, we are attempting
to evaluate the alignment geometry, without choosing a
material or robot. Thus it would be unfair to make any
assumptions about the dynamics or material characteristics
of the system. Additionally, we seek to isolate only the most
basic mechanical interactions of the geometries in the scope
of this experiment.
B. Simulation Parameters
The test performed to evaluate AA for the connectors
in each case is a simple ’drop test’. The parts are placed
over one another with initial offset and dropped under
gravitational force. One part rests on a ground plane so that it
does not fall away from the other part under gravity. Center
of mass is placed at the connector’s center of mass, so gravity
forces act through that point. The gravity force is equivalent
to an arm with force control on the end effector, which we
will use to verify real-world acceptance with this connector.
C. Numerical Limitations
Anomalies occasionally occurred that were clearly in-
correct, though this was rare (approx. 0.08%). We believe
this is due to a systematic rounding error in the physics
engine (ODE) that was in some cases capable of changing
the outcome of a trial. However, this effect appears to be
much less signiﬁcant away from the boundary of the AA
due to the less extreme angles involved. One set of initial
conditions near the boundary was simulated approx. 12,000
times with 9 failures, while a set of initial conditions near
the absolute center of the AA resulted in 0 failures after over
100,000 trials. Since the simulations sometimes consisted of
upwards of 5,000 trials, occasionally this problem resulted in
a disruption of the results. To combat this, we reimplemented
the simulation plugin to perform each trial 3 times, with the
majority result being accepted. This reduces the probability
that a given data point is incorrect to 5:08 10
 10
, but
triples the computation time required.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Simulation Veriﬁcation of ZRAA
A simple simulation veriﬁed the ZRAA. This was per-
formed in Gazebo as described above. As a way to prevent
rotation, the mass properties were changed. By increasing
the inertia ﬁve orders of magnitude, position changes took
1231
Fig. 3: Results of Simulation Testing across four selected
Areas of Acceptance. Inner rectangles represent feasible
range of acceptance conditions, which is the range over
which acceptance was tested.
Predicted 3D 
X-Face AA
Theoretical
Maximum
Predicted Area of Acceptance
Fig. 4: ZRAA Comparison. Left: Theoretical ZRAA based
on geometry. Right: Simulated ZRAA using Gazebo
extreme precedence over rotational changes. The numerical
simulation results are presented side-by-side with the analyt-
ical diagram in Figure 4.
The results show a nearly perfect match between the
simulation and the expected results. This veriﬁes both that
our simulator is capable of reproducing the ideal situation
and that the ZRAA is as expected.
B. Simulation of Other Areas of Acceptance
The X-Y , X-Pitch, X-Roll, and X-Yaw AA an be seen
in Figure 3. For these AA the inertia was returned to the
correct form, but dynamic effects were reduced. To that end
the gravity force was ampliﬁed (g=9000m=s
2
) and added a
high degree of damping. To accomplish the damping, we set
the exponential velocity decay term for both angular and
linear velocity to 0.99.
C. Discussion
While the ZRAA simulation results are straight forward,
the other areas of acceptance have a more irregular shape.
First, because we allow rotations in these cases, the position
range is reduced, as in the X-Y AA. Second, unaligned,
Fig. 5: A stable conﬁguration possible when rotations are
permitted. Both connectors are in contact with the ground
plane.
but stable conﬁgurations arise which are the cause of the
concavities visible in the other AAs. An example of a stable
conﬁguration can be seen in Figure 5. The geometry of the
faces allows for a considerable range of angular offsets to be
successful. Even when rotated

2
in pitch or roll, the shape
of the edges in conjunction with the location of the center
of mass causes forcing conditions to be favorable for the
connector.
Objectively, we see a relatively high acceptance for the
3D X-Face, taking up a large section of the available space.
The Sum metric measurements from the simulation data for
X-Y ,X-Roll,X-Pitch, and X-Yaw are 0.336,0.527,0.481, and
0.504, respectively. It is difﬁcult to accurately predict the
full Sum value from these values, so we leave this to future
work, when the full AA may be simulated at an acceptable
resolution for analysis.
An optimistic estimate is the largest N-cube that can be
formed that is consistent with the given two dimensional
slices. This is found by the maximum circumscribed cube
about the minimum of maximum inscribed squares of the two
dimensional slice data. For orthogonal slices, this reduces to
the largest n-cube which is the one with a side length equal to
the length of the side of the minimum square. The Oriented
N-Cube side lengths for X-Y ,X-Roll,X-Pitch,and X-Yaw are
0.390,0.536,0.415,and 0.524 respectively. So the optimistic
Oriented N-Cube metric is 0.390.
A more conservative estimate assumes a ’diagonal’ lin-
ear relationship between 2D planes; this results in a ﬁve-
dimensional ’diamond’ shape. We solve this by creating a
hyperplane in the positive orthant with the corner points from
each of the four squares we have solved for in simulation
(plus an extra point relating y and yaw; symmetry means
X-Yaw is identical to Y-Yaw). We then solve for the point
on that hyperplane that crosses the vector from the origin
along (1,1,1,1,1). This gives us a vector (d,d,d,d,d) where d
is the size of our n-cube. For the simulation data, we found
this value to be 0.204.
VII. PROTOTYPE CONSTRUCTION AND TESTING
To verify our simulation results and make use of this
design to dock our modular robots, prototypes of the 3D X-
Face were constructed. These prototypes were constructed
on the 65.5 mm x 65.5 mm scale, corresponding to the face
size of the present version of CKBots [18]. The prototypes
were 3D-printed on an Objet30 Photopolymer Printer out
of VeroBlack material. This 3D-printing process has the
1232
advantage of giving a smoother ﬁnish than fused-deposition
modeling. The lack of friction in our prototypes aids in
matching the conditions in the simulation.
The full testing setup can be seen in Figure 1. An overhead
arm composed of CKBot modules carries out a vertical
trajectory while the cart on casters on the bottom is free
to move in the plane for alignment. Grid paper below the
cart and a positioning jig let us measure the offset by hand
to an estimated error range of 1mm.
0 2 4 6 8
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
TestingfResultsfwithfCKBotfarm
XfOffsetf(mm)
YfOffsetf(mm)
Success
Failure
Fig. 6: Results from testing on CKBot arm platform in Fig.
1. Natural symmetry of the geometry allows us to test only
a single quadrant without loss of accuracy.
Testing was carried out at select points on the boundary,
in 1cm or 0.5cm increments as seen in Figure 6. No point
outside the expected boundary of the AA was observed
to align successfully, but instead ’rejected’ the connector
away. Likewise no point inside the boundary failed to align
successfully, despite the proximity to the boundary of several
points. This testing conﬁrms that the ZRAA performs as
expected on a real platform.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The 3D X-Face compares favorably to existing connectors.
For ZRAA, the Sum metric was determined to be 27%
larger than existing gendered connectors and 467% larger
than existing ungendered connectors. The Oriented N-Cube
metric showed 111% improvement over existing ungendered
connectors.
The simulation results reveal stable conﬁgurations and
insight into the shape of the full AA including interactions
between offsets in different dimensions. From the simulation
data, the estimated Oriented N-Cube metric for the full AA
is 0.204 to 0.390. It is hoped that future designs can be
compared with this ﬁgure of merit. Prototypes of the 3D X-
Face geometry were 3D-printed and tested for ZRAA in a
low-friction environment with a CKBot arm. These physical
experiments validated the simulation and analysis.
In future work, we will examine design parameters like
aspect ratio (connector height compared to cross-section),
center of rotation, and kinematic restrictions. Dynamic in-
teractions should be explored. Varying the approach path
has a signiﬁcant effect on the acceptance, and many self-
reconﬁgurable systems do not have a perpendicular approach.
In the future we may replace the faces of the CKBots with a
latching version of this connector for full reconﬁgurability.
This would allow us to gain the advantages of the 3D X-Face
alignment without changing the connectability of the system.
A latch on the exterior of the face similar to the DRAGON
connector, could possibly add latching with minimal effect
on the alignment geometry.
Acknowledgements: The authors would like to thank
Martin Nilsson, SICS for his essential information on the
DRAGON Connector.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Støy, An Introduction to Self-Reconﬁgurable Robots. Boston, MA:
MIT Press, 2009.
[2] N. Eckenstein and M. Yim, “The x-face: An improved planar pas-
sive mechanical connector for modular self-reconﬁgurable robots,” in
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). IEEE, 2012, pp. 3073–3078.
[3] M. Nilsson, “Symmetric docking in 2d: A bound on self-alignable
offsets,” in IASTED ’99: Robotics and Automation, Oct. 1999.
[4] ——, “Connectors for self-reconﬁguring robots,” IEEE/ASME Trans-
actions on Mechatronics, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 473–474, 2002.
[5] J. J. Cong and R. Fitch, “The x-claw self-aligning connector for self-
reconﬁguring modular robots,” in IROS ’11: Proceedings of the Work-
shop on Reconﬁgurable Modular Robotics: Challenges of Mechatronic
and Bio-Chemo-Hybrid Systems, 2011.
[6] W.-M. Shen, R. Kovac, and M. Rubenstein, “Singo: A single-
end-operative and genderless connector for self-reconﬁguration, self-
assembly and self-healing,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 4253–4258.
[7] G. Fu, A. Menciassi, and P. Dario, “Development of a genderless and
fail-safe connection system for autonomous modular robots,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics (ROBIO),
2011, pp. 877–882.
[8] M. Yim, D. Duff, and K. Roufas, “Polybot: a modular reconﬁgurable
robot,” in Proceedings. ICRA ’00. IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, vol. 1, 2000, pp. 514–520 vol.1.
[9] H. Kurokawa, K. Tomita, A. Kamimura, S. Kokaji, T. Hasuo,
and S. Murata, “Distributed self-reconﬁguration of m-tran iii
modular robotic system,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 27, no. 3-4, pp. 373–386, 2008. [Online]. Available:
http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/27/3-4/373.abstract
[10] M. Kutzer, M. Moses, C. Brown, D. Scheidt, G. Chirikjian, and
M. Armand, “Design of a new independently-mobile reconﬁgurable
modular robot,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2010, pp. 2758–2764.
[11] C. Unsal and P. K. Khosla, “Solutions for 3d self-reconﬁguration
in a modular robotic system: implementation and motion
planning,” vol. 4196, 2000, pp. 388–401. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1117/12.403737
[12] A. Castano, A. Behar, and P. Will, “The conro modules for recon-
ﬁgurable robots,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 7,
no. 4, pp. 403–409, 2002.
[13] R. Garcia, J. Hiller, K. Stoy, and H. Lipson, “A vacuum-based bonding
mechanism for modular robotics,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 876–890, 2011.
[14] M. Badescu and C. Mavroidis, “Novel active connector for modular
robotic systems,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 8,
no. 3, pp. 342–351, 2003.
[15] I. Vasilescu, P. Varshavskaya, K. Kotay, and D. Rus, “Autonomous
modular optical underwater robot (amour) design, prototype and
feasibility study,” in Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, april 2005, pp. 1603 – 1609.
[16] T. Fukuda, M. Buss, H. Hosokai, and Y . Kawauchi, “Cell structured
robotic system cebot: Control, planning and communication methods,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 7, no. 23, pp. 239 – 248, 1991,
special Issue Intelligent Autonomous Systems. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/092188909190045M
[17] G. Studer and H. Lipson, “Spontaneous emergence of self-replicating
structures in molecube automata,” in Proc. of the 10th Int. Conf. on the
Simulation and Synthesis of Living Systems (Artiﬁcial Life X), 2006,
pp. 227–233.
[18] J. Davey, J. Sastra, M. Piccoli, and M. Yim, “Modlock: A manual
connector for reconﬁgurable modular robots,” in IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012,
pp. 3217–3222.
1233
