Linear Torque Actuation using FPGA-Controlled Magneto-Rheological
Actuators*
Wenjun Li, Peyman Yadmellat and Mehrdad R. Kermani
1
Abstract— In recent years, Magneto-Rheological (MR)
clutches have been increasingly used for realizing compliant
actuation. One difﬁculty in using MR clutches is the existence
of nonlinear hysteretic behaviors between the input current and
output torque of an MR clutch. In this paper, a new closed-loop,
Field-Programable-Gate-Array (FPGA) based control scheme
to linearize an MR clutch’s input-output relationship is pre-
sented. The feedback signal used in this control scheme is the
magnetic ﬁeld acquired from hall sensors within the MR clutch.
The FPGA board uses this feedback signal to compensate for
the nonlinear behavior of the MR clutch using an estimated
model of the clutch magnetic ﬁeld. The local use of an FPGA
board will dramatically simplify the use of MR clutches for
torque actuation. The effectiveness of the proposed technique
is validated using an experimental platform that includes an
MR clutch as part of a compliant actuation mechanism. The
results clearly demonstrate that the use of the FPGA based
closed-loop control scheme can effectively eliminate hysteretic
behaviors of the MR clutch, allowing to have linear actuators
with predictable behaviors.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the past two decades, a wide range of compliant ac-
tuators have been proposed and developed within the context
of Human-Compatible, and Human-Friendly Robots. The
main idea behind introducing compliance in the actuation
is to reduce the effective impedance of the actuator for
leveraging the safety properties of the actuator. Pneumatic
muscle-like actuators are perhaps among the earlier forms
of compliant actuators (e.g. McKibben muscles [1]). The
output impedance of pneumatic actuators is typical low due
to the close-to-zero inductance of the compressible gas in
the actuator. Unfortunately, the compliance of pneumatic
actuators results in a reduced controllable bandwidth of these
actuators.
Compliant actuators have also been realized mechanically.
Series Elastic Actuator (SEA) [2] is an initial attempt to
reduce the actuator’s impedance using an elastic element
placed between the input motor and the output load. Within
its controllable bandwidth, SEA has a very low output
impedance, and beyond its bandwidth, SEA impedance
matches the stiffness of the elastic coupling [3]. Nonetheless,
similar to pneumatic actuators, SEA suffers from a limit-
ed controllable bandwidth. To address this issue, Variable
Stiffness Actuator (VSA) was proposed as an alternative
*This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineer-
ing Research Council (NSERC) of Canada under Grant RGPIN 346166 and
Ontario of Centres of Excellence (OCE) under Grant MR 90545.
1
The authors are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering
Department, the University of Western Ontario, London, ON N6A
5B9 Canada wli365@uwo.ca, pyadmell@uwo.ca,
mkermani@eng.uwo.ca.
compliant actuation solution [4]. VSA also integrates an
elastic element into its transmission path, but unlike SEA,
the stiffness of the transmission coupling is variable. This
allows VSA to become more compliant during high velocity
tasks and stiffer during low velocity tasks to provide both
improved performance and safe actuation. Instead of incor-
porating an elastic element, Series Damper Actuator (SDA)
incorporates a rotary damper into its transmission path for
increasing the bandwidth [5]. This conﬁguration allows the
output force/torque of the actuator to be controlled based
on the relative angular velocity between the motor and the
damper. While SDA has a slightly better bandwidth than
VSA, the bandwidth is still below the demand of most high
performance applications. To take advantage of both VSA
and SDA concepts in one unit, Variable Impedance Actu-
ator (VIA) was proposed [6]. A combination of a variable
elastic element and a variable damping element is used to
connect the input and output parts in VIA. This connection
allows VIA to change its stiffness without compromising the
bandwidth. Similar to VIA, Double Actuator Unit (DAU)
proposed in [7] uses two actuators and a planetary gear
train to immediately reduce joint impedance following the
detection of a dynamic collision.
In recent years, the use of Magneto-Rheological (MR) ﬂu-
ids for realizing compliant actuation has received increasing
attentions. In comparison to compliant actuators mentioned
above, MR actuators can provide larger controllable band-
width and safe actuation inherent in the design. A compliant
actuation using an MR clutch to couple an input motor to
an output load was studied in [8]. This actuator provided
a maximum torque of 5 Nm. Later, the transient response
of the actuator was improved to near 30Hz by replacing
Aluminum with an engineering plastic in all connecting
parts of the MR clutch [9]. An MR actuator with a locking
mechanism was used as an assistive knee brace in [10]. The
MR device acted as a brake when the lock was on and as
a clutch when the lock was off. The locking mechanism
was used to ﬁx the shaft of the MR actuator to the brace.
Dual Differential Rheological Actuator (DDRA) is another
MR ﬂuids based compliant actuator [11]. DDRA couples
two different MR brakes, each of which moved at the same
speed but in opposite directions. The coupled MR brakes
generate an output torque with an applied magnetic ﬁeld.
The controllable bandwidth of DDRA is limited to 4Hz and
the hysteresis of the MR brakes have not been addressed.
In our previous body of work, we developed a new ac-
tuation mechanism known as Distributed Active Semiactive
Actuator (DASA) using MR clutches [12]. This is a novel
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1060
Fig. 1. The block diagram of the proposed control scheme.
actuation concept whose full details and advantages have
been reported in [13]–[15]. DASA has high torque-to-mass
and torque-to-inertia ratios and in comparison to similar
actuation concepts features a more compact structure [13].
The performance of the actuator in terms of the controllable
bandwidth and time response competes with servo motors
within the same torque range [12]. The use of MR clutch in
DASA, however, presents a nonlinear hysteretic relationship
between the input current and output torque of the actuator.
This nonlinear relationship poses a challenge in controlling
the actuator. In order to overcome this shortcoming, a new
hysteresis model to replicate the nonlinear relationship be-
tween the actuator input and output was developed [16].
However, it has been shown that the shear stress of MR
ﬂuids has a linear relationship with the applied magnetic
ﬁeld [12]. In other words, the output torque of DASA was
almost linearly proportional to the intensity of the applied
magnetic ﬁeld and the nonlinear behavior of the actuator
mainly stemmed from hysteretic relationship between the
magnetic ﬁeld and the input current of the actuator.
The main contribution of this paper is to present a closed-
loop control scheme that linearizes the behavior of DASA.
The feedback signal used for the closed-loop control is
the magnetic ﬁeld information obtained from a proprietary
arrangement of embedded hall sensors in DASA. Using the
magnetic ﬁeld information and the hysteresis model of the
actuator, the controller can linearize the output torque of
the actuator in relation to its input current. The closed-
loop controller is implemented on a Field-Programable-Gate-
Array (FPGA) board which makes it possible to be embedded
into the future generation of DASA. Given the relatively
linear relationship of the actuator torque with respect to its
internal magnetic ﬁeld, it is possible to perform high ﬁdelity
force/torque control without using any external force/torque
sensor. The use of hall sensors provides a reliable, com-
pact, and more importantly viable alternative to external
force/torque sensors. This concept is validated in this paper
through a set of experiments performing on a prototyped
DASA with FPGA based control. This technique allows
DASA to fully exhibit predictable and linear input-output
characteristics. A block diagram of the proposed closed-loop,
FPGA based control scheme is shown in Fig. 1.
The remaining of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II reviews the structure of the MR clutch used in this
paper for validating the results. Section III discusses the FP-
GA based closed-loop scheme for controlling torques/forces
using MR clutches. Section IV presents experimental results
for torque control using estimated torque values and com-
pares the results with that using actual torque measurements.
Section V concludes the paper.
II. MR CLUTCH
MR ﬂuids, carrying micrometer-scale particles, are a kind
of smart materials whose viscosity can be changed using an
external magnetic ﬁeld. This property of MR ﬂuids allows to
accurately control the shear stress of the ﬂuid by controlling
the intensity of an external magnetic ﬁeld. A clutch-like
mechanism, also known as MR clutch, is often used as means
of materializing this concept through bounding the amount
of transmitted torque based on the intensity of an applied
magnetic ﬁeld. This form of torque transmission lends itself
to a new type of compliant actuator also referred to MR
actuator. In our previous body of work, we designed and
developed a novel MR actuator known as Distributed Active
Semiactive Actuator (DASA) [14] [15]. In this actuation
mechanism an electric motor (active component) is coupled
to one or more MR clutches (semi-active component), where
all clutches receive their power from the motor (distributed
actuation). The electric motor provides a rather constant
power and each MR clutch controls the transmission of
torque to its output shaft independently. Since the focus of
this paper is on hysteresis compensation, we consider a unit
MR clutch as a building block of our actuation concept
DASA. Fig.2 demonstrates the cross-section of a typical
multi-disks style MR clutch. The input shaft breaks out into a
set of output disks attached to the output shaft. MR ﬂuids ﬁll
the volume between input and output disks. By energizing
the electromagnetic coil, the shear stress of MR ﬂuids can
be controlled by an applied magnetic ﬁeld, which leads to
altering of output torque [13].
Fig. 2. Cross-section of a multi-disk MR clutch.
III. TORQUE CONTROL IN THE MR CLUTCH
Unlike electric motors that feature linear relationship
between their input current and output torque, in an MR
clutch, the input and output are nonlinearly related with
hysteresis. This hysteretic behavior is mainly caused by the
ferromagnetic components of an MR clutch [17] and is
demonstrated in Fig. 3. We applied sinusoidal input currents
with different frequencies to an MR clutch and Fig. 3 shows
that the magnetic ﬁled inside the MR clutch and the output
torque are nonlinear with the input current.
1061
0.6 0.8 1 1.2
50
55
60
65
70
Input Current (A)
Magnetic Flux Density (mT)
 
 
0.6 0.8 1 1.2
50
60
70
80
Input Current (A)
Magnetic Flux Density (mT)
 
 
0.6 0.8 1 1.2
6
8
10
12
Input Current (A)
Output Torque (Nm)
 
 
0.6 0.8 1 1.2
5
6
7
8
9
10
Input Current (A)
Output Torque (Nm)
 
 
1 Hz
5 Hz
5 Hz 1 Hz
Fig. 3. Hysteretic behavior for an MR clutch.
One way to cope with this shortcoming is to employ
an external torque sensor to provide the feedback signal
for a closed-loop control system that regulates the torque.
Despite availability of multi-axis force/torque sensors, this
technique cannot provide favorable results due to other
undesired effects such as friction, backlash, cogging effects
of the actuators, measurement noise, and modeling errors.
Notwithstanding, the high cost of the sensors and unreliable
nature of the results in applications that concern interactions
with the human present additional challenges. An alternative
solution to deal with nonlinear behavior of an MR clutch is to
compensate it, if not eliminating it, at the design level. This
can be achieved using magnetic ﬁeld information of the MR
clutch to ﬁrst estimate the output torque of the clutch and
then compensate for any error. The estimation can be done
accurately given the linear relationship between the shear
stress of MR ﬂuids and applied magnetic ﬁeld. An analogy
can be drawn between this technique and that previously used
in Series Elastic actuators [2] and Hydro Elastic actuators
[18] for estimating the actuator torque, in which an encoder
measures the deﬂection of an spring. The same concept that
eliminate hysteresis by embedding hall effect sensors inside
an MR brake was proposed in [19]. However, the relationship
between magnetic ﬁled and output torque in [19] does not
consider dynamic behaviors of an MR brake. In this paper,
we discuss the use of hall sensor to measure the internal
magnetic ﬁeld of the MR clutch and to estimate the output
torque of the clutch accurately. Since the input of the MR
clutch is the electric current, the technique presented here
results in a linear relation between the input current and
output torque of the MR clutch. An FPGA based closed-
loop control algorithm is used to perform this linearization
technique. This technique results in a fully linear torque
actuator assuming a gray-box input-output view of the MR
actuator.
A. Control Scheme
As described in the previous section, the linear relation of
the output torque to the magnetic ﬁeld intensity is a major
advantage in an MR clutch. This linear relationship allows
controlling the output torque of the MR clutch accurately in
a conﬁguration shown in Fig. 4. In this ﬁgure, a simple PID
controller provides a reference current for the MR clutch
for generating the desired output torque value. The PID
controller compares the estimated value of the output torque
with its desired value as the input error signal. The estimated
value of the output torque is obtained using the model
described in the following sections. The model provides an
accurate estimation of the output torque given the one-to-
one relation of the output torque to the applied magnetic
ﬁeld. The intensity of the magnetic ﬁeld is measured using a
proprietary arrangement of embedded hall sensors inside our
MR clutch. The error between the desired output torque and
its estimated values provides a reference signal for a current
source that drives the electromagnetic coil inside the MR
clutch. The proposed model used for estimating the output
Fig. 4. Closed-loop control conﬁguration using embedded hall sensors.
torque of the MR clutch consists of two parts: a static model
and a dynamic model. Each part of this model is elaborated
in the following sections.
B. Static Model
It has been shown that the visco-plastic Bingham model
is a good candidate for representing the static behavior of
the output torque in an MR clutch [20]–[24]. The Bingham
model is a geometrical based model, which relates the shear
stress to the yield stress and shear rate of MR ﬂuids in
MR clutches. With shear stress, the static output torque of
the clutch can be obtained by integrating the shear stress.
A model of the MR clutch based on the Bingham model
was developed to predict the rheological properties of our
actuator in a previous body of work [13], [16]. According to
this model, the shear stress can be presented as:
 =
y
(B)+
dv
dz
; >
y
(1)
where  is the shear stress, 
y
is the ﬁeld dependent yield
stress,B is the magnetic ﬁeld, is the Newtonian viscosity,
and
dv
dz
is the velocity gradient in the direction of the ﬁeld.
The viscosity  of the carrier ﬂuid is typically in the range
of 0.1 to 0.3 Pa-s. The second term in (1) can be ignored
due to its negligible effect on the estimated values of the
output torque. In fact, the contribution of the ﬁrst term in
(1) is within the range of kPa-s torque for typical MR ﬂuids,
whereas for the second term this value does not exceed a
few Pa-s.
Assuming the conﬁguration depicted in Fig. 2 for an MR
clutch, the torque produced by a circumferential element at
a radius r is given by,
dT =2r
2
dr: (2)
Integrating (2) across the output disks and substituting (1),
the static output torque of the MR clutch can be obtained as
1062
follows
T
s
'
4
3
N
y
(B)(R
3
2
 R
3
1
): (3)
where N is the number of output disks, and R1 and R2 are
the inner and outer radius of the disks, respectively.
Moreover, considering the linear relationship between
yield stress and magnetic ﬁeld, we have:

y
(B)=cB; (4)
where c=56.135 is a constant.
Substituting (4) into (3) yields the output torque of MR
clutch as a static function of the magnetic ﬁeld B:
T
s
'kB: (5)
wherek =4cN(R
3
2
 R
3
1
)=3 is a constant that depends on
geometrical parameters of the clutch.
C. Dynamic Model
While the Bingham model can accurately estimate the
output torque of an MR clutch statically, there are some
discrepancies between the estimated values of the torque
and its actual value measurement in dynamic mode. The
presence of mechanical components within an MR clutch
is perhaps the main factor that differentiates the dynamic
behavior of an MR clutch from its static model. Not unlike
any other mechanical system, the disk’s inertia in an MR
clutch, ﬂuidic friction, and the gravity can affect the dynamic
behavior of the clutch. Another factor that is speciﬁc to MR
clutches is the various response time of the MR ﬂuid in
different parts of the clutch. Using ﬁnite element analysis,
it has been shown that the magnetic ﬁeld is stronger near
the coil location and weaker elsewhere (e.g. in [25], [26]).
As a consequence, the MR ﬂuid reacts with different time
responses in different locations of an MR clutch. Taking all
these issues into consideration, it is very difﬁcult, if not
impossible, to develop a physic-based dynamic model for
an MR clutch and is outside the focus of the current study.
In order to include the dynamic behavior of an MR clutch
in the modeling, we use a well-known Auto Regressive with
eXternal input (ARX) technique [27, ch. 10]. The ARX
model is basically a linear difference equation between the
input and output, which relates next output value to the
previous observations. Using the ARX model, a dynamic
model for estimating the output torque can be constructed.
The input to this model is the static torque obtained in (5)
and the output is the estimated dynamic torque value. The
resulting model is given by,
^
T(t) =  a
1
^
T(t 1) ::: a
n
^
T(t n)
+b
1
T
s
(t 1)+:::+b
m
T
s
(t m); (6)
where
^
T is the estimated value of the output torque and T
s
is the static torque obtained in (5).
D. Implementation on FPGA
In order to implement the PID controller and the mod-
el proposed previously for linearizing the MR clutch, a
Field-Programable-Gate-Array (FPGA) board is employed a
closed-loop feedback conﬁguration. The FPGA board im-
plements the PID controller and the proposed model with
Verilog Hardware Description Language (HDL). An FPGA-
based controller provides a fast and ﬂexible platform for
linearizing MR clutches using various functions and con-
ﬁgurations. More importantly, the use of FPGA technology
facilitates its future integration in the design of an MR clutch
and DASA as a fully embedded component.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A set of experiments to validate the proposed model
and the effectiveness of the overall control scheme is pre-
sented in this section. In the experimental setup the MR
clutch prototype is driven by a servo ampliﬁer (Maxon
4-Q-DC Servo-ampliﬁer ADS 50/5) conﬁgured in torque
mode for providing the command current. A static load
cell (Transducer Techniques SBO-1K) is mounted on the
output shaft for torque measurements and a hall sensor
(TLE 4990 Inﬁneon Technologies) is integrated inside the
MR clutch for magnetic ﬁled measurements. The location
of the hall sensor was embedded into an aluminum disk
which is aligned in parallel to the output disks. Because
the relative permeability of TLE 4990 is close to aluminum,
we can achieve uniform distribution of magnetic ﬁled on
that aluminium disk and the measurements from TLE 4990
is proportion to the magnetic ﬁeld of MR ﬂuids. A servo
motor (Maxon EC 60) provides the rotational input to the MR
clutch. A National Instruments (NI USB-6229) multifunction
I/O device is employed to provide reference torque values
for the actuator and to acquire the output signals from the
load cell. The sampling frequency for collecting experimental
data is set to 500 Hz. The proposed model and the PID
controller are implemented on a spartan-3E starter kit board
from Xilinx.
A. Validation of the Proposed Model
The one-to-one relationship between the magnetic ﬁeld
and the output torque is an explicit advantage in MR clutches
and the main assumption behind developing the proposed
model. This assumption can be validated by applying a
sinusoidal current to our MR clutch prototype and observing
the changes in the output torque with respect to changes in
magnetic ﬁeld. Fig. 5 shows these changes for an applied
1 Hz sinusoidal input current. As observed in this ﬁgure,
despite minor lagging effects (due to dynamic characteris-
tic), the MR clutch demonstrates a one-to-one relationship
between its output torque and its magnetic ﬁeld that justiﬁes
the use of Bingham model in static modes.
1063
0 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
4
6
8
10
12
Magnetic Field (T)
Torque (Nm)
Fig. 5. Output torque vs. magnetic ﬁeld for a 1Hz sinusoidal input current.
Multi-Sine
1
and Swept-Sine
2
signals are usually used to
validate (or invalidate) the accuracy of a model, given their
richness in exciting all possible modes of a dynamic system
[27, ch. 13]. To this effect, both Multi-Sine and Swept-Sine
signals were applied to the clutch to validate the accuracy of
our proposed model. The Multi-Sine current signal was the
average of 10 sinusoids with different frequencies selected
uniformly within the range of 2Hz to 5Hz. The frequency
range of the Swept-Sine current signal was chosen in the
same range. Figs. 6 depicts the predicted versus measured
output torques corresponding to the Multi-Sine and Swept-
Sine signals. The results show that the prediction results
follow closely the actual measurements. In fact, the Root
Mean Square Errors(RMSEs) between the estimated and the
actual torque values are 0.1635 Nm and 0.3527 Nm for the
Multi-Sine and Swept-Sine signals, respectively. Moderate
errors at the beginning of the results are associated with the
low frequency components of the input signals, where the
proposed dynamic model shows the least accuracy. This is
because that the model is identiﬁed with more weight being
put on the higher frequencies, and it can be addressed by
adjusting the identiﬁcation signals depending on the intended
application for the MR clutch. Nonetheless, the results show
a very accurate estimation for high frequency which is
usually more desirable for control purposes.
B. Torque Control Experiments
The performance of the proposed FPGA based closed-loop
controller is evaluated in this section. Two conﬁgurations
are considered to control the output torque of the MR
clutch. In the ﬁrst conﬁguration, the proposed FPGA based
method is utilized along with magnetic ﬁeld measurements
for estimating the output torque used as feedback signal
in the closed-loop control. In the second conﬁguration, the
actual torque measurements are used in the closed-loop
control as feedback signal. Both conﬁgurations use a PID
controller in their control loop. The error signal in the ﬁrst
conﬁguration is computed using the estimated and the desired
torque values, while the actual torque measurements are used
1
i(t) =
P
n
k=1

k
cos(!
k
), where 
k
and !
k
, k = 1;:::;n are
amplitudes and frequencies of sinusoids, respectively.
2
i(t) = Asin(
1
2
(
2(f
2
 f
1
)
n
)
2
+ 4f
1
), where A, f
1
, f
2
and n
are amplitude, normalized start frequency, normalized stop frequency and
number of samples of Swept-Sine signal, respectively.
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
2
4
6
Torque(Nm) (a)
 
 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
0
5
10
(b)
TIme(s)
Torque(Nm)
 
 
Measurement Dynamic Estimation
Measurement Dynamic Estimation
Fig. 6. Torque measurement versus dynamic estimation, (a) Multi-Sine
input current, (b) Swept-Sine input current.
for error calculations in the second conﬁguration. Several
desired torque signals were considered. In each case, the
PID controllers were optimised to obtain the best possible
control results. Fig. 7 shows the results for a square, 1
and 5 Hz sinusoids, and a Multi-Sine desired torques. In
this ﬁgure, Measured 1 and Measured 2 refer to the load
cell measurements in the ﬁrst and second conﬁgurations,
respectively. These results clearly validate the efﬁcacy of the
proposed model for tracking a desired torque using the MR
clutch, where no external torque measurements are used in
the control loop. The results closely match those that are
obtained using actual torque measurements. While there is
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
0
5
10
3
9
Torque(Nm) (a)
 
 
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
5
6
7
8
9
(c) Torque(Nm)
 
 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
0
2
4
6
8
(d)
Time(s)
Torque(Nm)
 
 
0 0.5 1 1.5 2
6
7
8
9
10
11
(b) Torque(Nm)
Desired Measured1 Measured2
Fig. 7. Torque control for (a) square, (b) 1Hz sinusoidal, (c) 5Hz sinusoidal,
and (d) Multi-Sine reference torque.
a slight difference between the results of the two conﬁgu-
rations, it can be clearly seen that accurate torque control
1064
is achieved in both conﬁgurations. One should however,
note that the ﬁrst conﬁguration requires no additional torque
sensor which is the main signiﬁcance and contribution of
the current work. Moreover, it is reasonable to assume that
improving the accuracy of the dynamic model can lead to a
more accurate torque control.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel FPGA based closed-loop control
scheme was proposed for linearizing the output torque of an
MR clutch as a function of its input current. In the proposed
scheme, the FPGA board regulates the output torque of the
MR clutch using its magnetic ﬁeld measurements acquired
by a set of embedded hall sensors. Using this information,
the output torque of the clutch is ﬁrst estimated and is
then used to provide the required feedback for adjusting the
input current of the clutch accordingly. To this effect, the
FPGA board implements a PID controller to eliminate the
error between the estimated and desired torque values. A
set of experiments were conducted to validate the efﬁcacy
of this technique. The results clearly demonstrated that an
MR clutch could act as an entirely linear torque actuator to
follow any reference torque signal.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Tondu and P. Lopez, “The mckibben muscle and its use in actuating
robot-arms showing similarities with human arm behaviour,” Industrial
Robot: An International Journal, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 432–439, 1997.
[2] G. Pratt and M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems 95. ’Human Robot Interaction and Cooperative
Robots’, Proceedings. 1995 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on,
vol. 1, pp. 399–406, IEEE, 1995.
[3] M. Zinn, B. Roth, O. Khatib, and J. Salisbury, “A new actuation
approach for human friendly robot design,” The international journal
of robotics research, vol. 23, no. 4-5, pp. 379–398, 2004.
[4] A. Bicchi and G. Tonietti, “Fast and soft-arm tactics [robot arm
design],” Robotics & Automation Magazine, IEEE, vol. 11, no. 2,
pp. 22–33, 2004.
[5] C. Chew, G. Hong, and W. Zhou, “Series damper actuator: a nov-
el force/torque control actuator,” in Humanoid Robots, 2004 4th
IEEE/RAS International Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 533–546, IEEE,
2004.
[6] A. Bicchi, G. Tonietti, and R. Schiavi, “Safe and fast actuators for
machines interacting with humans,” in Robotics and Automation, 2004.
TExCRA’04. First IEEE Technical Exhibition Based Conference on,
pp. 17–18, IEEE, 2004.
[7] B. Kim, J. Park, and J. Song, “Double actuator unit with planetary
gear train for a safe manipulator,” in Robotics and Automation, 2007
IEEE International Conference on, pp. 1146–1151, IEEE, 2007.
[8] N. Takesue, H. Asaoka, J. Lin, M. Sakaguchi, G. Zhang, and J. Fu-
rusho, “Development and experiments of actuator using mr ﬂuid,”
in Industrial Electronics Society, 2000. IECON 2000. 26th Annual
Confjerence of the IEEE, vol. 3, pp. 1838–1843, IEEE, 2000.
[9] N. Takesue, J. Furusho, and Y . Kiyota, “Fast response mr-ﬂuid actua-
tor,” JSME International Journal Series C, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. 783–791,
2004.
[10] J. Chen and W. Liao, “Design, testing and control of a magne-
torheological actuator for assistive knee braces,” Smart Materials and
Structures, vol. 19, no. 3, p. 035029, 2010.
[11] P. Fauteux, M. Lauria, M. Legault, B. Heintz, and F. Michaud,
“Dual differential rheological actuator for robotic interaction tasks,”
in Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics, 2009. AIM 2009. IEEE/ASME
International Conference on, pp. 47–52, IEEE, 2009.
[12] A. S. Shafer and M. R. Kermani, “Design and validation of a magneto-
rheological clutch for practical control applications in human-friendly
manipulation,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on, pp. 4266–4271, IEEE, 2011.
[13] A. S. Shafer and M. R. Kermani, “On the feasibility and suitability
of mr ﬂuid clutches in human-friendly manipulators,” Mechatronics,
IEEE/ASME Transactions on, no. 99, pp. 1–10, 2011.
[14] A. S. Shafer and M. R. Kermani, “Magneto-rheological clutch with
sensors measuring electromagnetic ﬁeld strength,” Apr. 14 2011. WO
Patent/2011/041890.
[15] A. S. Shafer and M. R. Kermani, “Magneto- and electro- rheological
based actuators for human friendly manipulators,” Nov. 1 2009. United
States Patent U.S. Provisional Patent, Serial No. 61/272,597. 2009.
[16] P. Yadmellat and M. Kermani, “Adaptive modeling of a magnetorheo-
logical clutch,” Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on, in press,
doi: 10.1109/TMECH.2013.2292594.
[17] P. Yadmellat, A. S. Shafer, and M. R. Kermani, “Development of a
safe robot manipulator using a new actuation concept,” in Robotics and
Automation, IEEE International Conference on, pp. 337–342, IEEE,
2013.
[18] G. Pratt and D. Robinson, “Force-controlled hydro-elastic actuator,”
Dec. 17 2002. US Patent 6,494,039.
[19] O. Erol, B. Gonenc, D. Senkal, S. Alkan, and H. Gurocak, “Magnetic
induction control with embedded sensor for elimination of hysteresis
in magnetorheological brakes,” Journal of Intelligent Material Systems
and Structures, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 427–440, 2012.
[20] P. Yadmellat and M. R. Kermani, “Adaptive modeling of a fully
hysteretic magneto-rheological clutch,” in Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 2698–2703,
IEEE, 2012.
[21] D. Wang and W. Liao, “Magnetorheological ﬂuid dampers: a review
of parametric modelling,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 20,
p. 023001, 2011.
[22] R. Phillips, “Engineering applications of ﬂuids with a variable yield
stress,” 1969.
[23] J. Carlson, “What makes a good mr ﬂuid?,” Journal of intelligent
material systems and structures, vol. 13, no. 7-8, pp. 431–435, 2002.
[24] M. Jolly, J. Bender, and J. Carlson, “Properties and applications of
commercial magnetorheological ﬂuids,” Journal of Intelligent Material
Systems and Structures, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 5–13, 1999.
[25] M. Avraam, MR-ﬂuid brake design and its application to a portable
muscular rehabilitation device. PhD thesis, Ph. D. thesis, Universit´ e
Libre de Bruxelle, Bruxelle, Belgium, 2009.
[26] P. Kielan, P. Kowol, and Z. Pilch, “Conception of the electronic
controlled magnetorheological clutch,” Przeglad Elektrotechniczny,
vol. 3, pp. 93–95, 2011.
[27] L. Lennart, “System identiﬁcation: theory for the user,” PTR Prentice
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 1999.
1065
