A New Force/Torque Sensor for Robotic Applications
Based on Optoelectronic Components
†
C. Melchiorri, L. Moriello, G. Palli and U. Scarcia
Abstract—In this paper, a novel force/torque sensor is pre-
sented. The sensor is based on optoelectronic components and
therefore its design is relatively simple and reliable. The sensor
design make it suitable for the integration in different robotic
systems, such as e.g. the ﬁngers of robotic hands. The basic
principleandthedesignofthesensoraredescribedinthispaper,
along with a speciﬁc prototype implemented for underwater
applications. Experimental data are presented and discussed to
illustrate the main features of the proposed sensor, and its use
as an intrinsic tactile sensor is evaluated.
Index Terms—Force/Torque Sensors, Optoelectronic Sensors,
Dexterous Manipulation, Intrinsic Tactile Sensors.
I. INTRODUCTION
The sense of touch is essential to properly manipulate
objects. The importance of having a proper sensing of the
contactforces exertedduringmanipulationtasks is provedby
the huge amountof work in tactile sensing literature.Despite
this, the design of reliable and accurate tactile sensors has
proventobeveryhard,andrelativelyfewcommercialdevices
are currently available, mainly due to high manufacturing
complexity and cost. Many different designs have been pro-
posed, and almost every kind of physical transduction princi-
ple has been exploitedto obtain a tactile sensor. A recent and
completereviewontactilesensors’stechnologiesandfeatures
is reported e.g. in [1]. With particular reference to optical-
based devices, many technologies have been proposed. A
very common technology is based on Fibre Bragg Gratings
(FBG), exploiting the relationship between the variations of
the FBG wavelength and the external force applied to the
FBG [2]. Other well known sensors are based on CCD
or CMOS camera to capture the deformation of a surface
caused by the external force [3]. Both technologies are
expensive, difﬁcult to integrate into complex robotic systems
(e.g. anthropomorphichands, robotic arms) and involve high
computational costs. Many other clever solutions are based
on discrete optoelectronic components. In these cases, the
sensorexploitsthescatteringorthereﬂectionofalightbeam.
Examples of scattering-based sensors are reported in [4] and
[5], in which the light beam of an light emitting diode(LED)
C. Melchiorri, L. Moriello, G. Palli and U. Scarcia are with DEI - De-
partment of Electrical, Electronic and Information Engineering - University
of Bologna, Italy (email: claudio.melchiorri@unibo.it).
This work is supported by the Italian National Project MARIS “Marine
Autonomous Robotics for InterventionS”.
†
Patent pending.
Fig. 1. The optoelectronic sensor and its CAD representation.
is scattered by a silicon dome and a urethane foam cavity
respectively. In both cases the working principle is the same:
the compression of the dome or the cavity due to applying
an external force, causes a scattered energy density variation
that is detected by several photodetector (PD). Particularly
noticeable is the research in the ﬁeld of optical force/torque
sensors carried out by Hirose and Yoneda [6]. They adopted
a 2-axes photosensor for the implementation of an optical
6-axes force/torque sensor. Another interesting example of
optical tactile sensor can be found in [7], in which a matrix
of LED/PD couples is covered by a deformable elastic layer.
In that case, the working principle is the union of cavity
scattering principle mentioned before, and of a taxel-based
reconstruction typical of CMOS sensors. In [8] instead, it is
described an example of a tactile/force sensor which exploits
the reﬂection of a light cone from a LED on a silicon rubber
dome. In this case, the force reconstruction is related to
the spatial distribution of the radiation intensity after the
reﬂection of the light on the deformable dome above the
optical components.
The 6-axes force/torque (F/T) sensor presented in this pa-
per exploit the optical reﬂection conceptmentioned above,in
orderto obtainaneasily scalableand lowcost intrinsictactile
sensor. The proposed sensor is characterized by a natural
robustness with respect to electromagnetic noise due to the
adoption of optical components, and requires an extremely
simple conditioning electronics. Moreover, the exploitation
of the light reﬂection simplify the cabling, making it easy to
integrate the sensor into complex robotic structures such as
robotic hands. This paper is structured as follows. In Sec. II
the principle of the sensor is described and the design of a
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6408
(a) Neutral base position. (b) Pure translation.
(c) Pure rotation.
Fig. 2. Reﬂection of an ideal cone of light
prototypereported.Notethatthedevelopedsensorisgoingto
be installed on a three-ﬁngered gripper for underwater tasks,
and therefore some design choices have been conditioned by
this particularapplication.In Sec. IIIexperimentalresults are
described and discussed, while Sec. IV concludes with ﬁnal
remarks and plans for future activity.
II. SENSOR CONCEPT AND DESIGN
The working principle of the proposed sensor is based
on the modulation of the current ﬂowing through a PD
caused by the power variation of the received light generated
by an infrared source such as an LED. In our design, the
light power variation is due to the variation of both the
angle of view and the length of the optical path between
the optoelectronic components [9]. Assuming a single LED
and a certain number of PDs arranged on the same plane
(mounted on the same electronic board), and a reﬂective
layer (a mirror) located above the electronic board able to
move with respect to the board plane. As seen for tactile
sensors, e.g. [7], the principle is to reconstruct the applied
force by measuring the motion/deformation of the elastic
layer on which the reﬂection or scattering of light occurs.
In this case, the reﬂective layer is not deformable, but it can
move if an external force is applied. Therefore, the idea is
to obtain position and orientation of the mirror (and then the
applied force and torque) from the light intensity measured
by photodiodes, i.e. from the spatial distribution of reﬂected
light cone.
A. Sensor Model and Validation
As a ﬁrst design step, a numerical model of the proposed
sensor has been developed and tested in simulation. The
modelisbasedonthesimplifyingassumptionsofgeometrical
optics: light rays propagationalways follow a rectilinear path
as far as they travel in a homogeneous medium. Figure 3
shows a LED and a PD mounted on the surface of a Printed
Circuit Board (PCB). In this conﬁguration, the light path
depends on the distance d and orientation ? of the mirror,
on which reﬂection is assumed to be specular as described
?
?
?
?
LED PD
?
PCB
Mirror
d
Fig. 3. Interaction between the optoelectronic components.
by the reﬂection law. Thus, the model compute the path
deﬁning ﬁrst an hypothetical triangle which lies on the
perpendicular plane of the mirror passing through the LED
and the photodiode,and having the reﬂection point,the LED,
and the PD positions as corners. Moreover the angle at the
reﬂection point corner must be 2? in agreement with the
reﬂection law. This geometrical approach allows to obtain
the radiation and reﬂection angles and the length l of the
optical path as the sum of the distances from the LED to the
reﬂection point and from the PD to the reﬂection point.
Themodelalso takes into accountthe reﬂection coefﬁcient
of the mirror. In Fig. 3, ? represents the angle between the
LED mechanical axis and the segment that denotes the light
path,while?representstheanglebetweenthePDmechanical
axis and the light path. The viewing angle between the two
components depends by the reﬂection angle ? and by the
mirror orientation ?. In this state a certain amount of light
emitted by the LED reaches the PD and it is proportionally
converted into an electrical current, I
p
(?,?). Recalling the
theory on LED radiation patterns [9], it is possible to model
the interaction of the optoelectronic components. In particu-
lar,if thelengthofthelightpathis largeenoughto renderthe
far-ﬁeld approximation valid, the LED and the PD could be
regarded as a point source and a point receiver, respectively.
In this case the photocurrent I
p
(?,?) will be proportional to
the product between the radiant intensity pattern of the LED,
evaluatedin? (denotedasL(?)) and theresponsivitypattern
of the PD, evaluated in ? (denoted as R (?), and inversely
proportional to the square of the light path length l
I
p
(?,?)=K
L(?)R (?)
l
2
(1)
where K is a proper constant.
When the mirror orientation ? and distance d from the
PCBexperienceavariationwithrespecttotheirinitialvalues,
the light path changes and a different amount of light power
will be sensed by the PD and a current variation occurs.
This happens because both the radiation pattern of the LED
and the responsivity pattern of the PD vary with the angles.
Moreover, the light path length changes with the mirror
orientation and distance. The combination of these effects
leads to the observed variations of the photocurrent. The
6409
0.007
0.008
0.009
0.01
0.011
0.012
0.013
0.014
0.015 ?4
?3
?2
?1
0
1
2
3
4
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
 
 0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
Angle [deg]
Distance [m]
Signal [V]
Fig. 4. Output of the model as a function of angle and distance of the
reﬂecting plane.
radiantintensity patternof theLEDL(·) and theresponsivity
pattern of the PD R(·) are available from the data-sheets of
the components.
Themodelhas been developedtakingas basic components
an infrared LED with a narrow viewing angle and with a
typical peak wavelength of 850 nm (Vishay VSMY2850G),
and a silicon NPN phototransistor (Osram SFH3010) as PD
with a maximum peak sensitivity at 860 nm wavelength.
An LED with a narrow viewing angle has been chosen to
avoid that the PD is illuminated by direct light from the
LED (without being reﬂected ﬁrst). Considering a LED/PD
couple arranged on a printed circuit board at a distance of
6 mm, Fig. 4 reports the PD output voltage for different
values of the distance and orientation of the mirror. This
ﬁgure shows a quite complex behaviour of the received light
power modulated by the mirror motion. However, two main
aspects are visible:
• The PD signal rapidly decreases while the distance
increases, as a consequence of the increasing optical
path length, related to the light intensity by the inverse-
square law;
• The angular modulation is a combination of the path
length variation and the angular displacement effects.
The choice of a narrow viewing angle LED is crucial
to boost this effect and allows to obtain good sensitivity
also on very small angular displacements (few degrees).
In orderto validate the model,a speciﬁc laboratory setup has
been developed to move the reﬂecting mirror (translational
and rotational motions) in a very precise and controlled way
by means of two linear motors, and the output voltage of the
PD has been measured and compared with the theoretical
model, see Fig. 5. The maximum error between the model
and the real data is about 10%, but in any case these results
are quite satisfactory since they allow to verify in advance
the characteristics of the sensor, based on a set of parameters
(optoelectroniccomponentselection and arrangementofboth
the components and the mirror). Moreover, although the
obtained characteristic is nonlinear, it is interesting to note
that in a region surrounding the centre of the plot (angle
= 0
o
, distance ≈ 10 mm) the outputs of both the model
0.005
0.01
0.015 -4
-2
0
2
4
6
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Angle [deg]
Distance [m]
Signal [V]
Fig. 5. Validation of the model (blue) compared with real data (red).
and the experimentaldevice present a very limited difference
and an almost linear behaviour. This allows to calibrate the
sensor in a quite simple manner. Aiming at measuring the
distance and the orientation of the mirror with respect to two
orthogonal axis in the LED/PD plane, another experimental
devicecomposedbytwopairsofPDssymmetricallyarranged
with respect to the LED has been designed. In this device,
theLED/PDarrangementreproducestheoneshownin Fig.2.
The results reported in Fig. 6 shown that this conﬁguration
allows to measure the distance and the rotation of the mirror,
at least for limited displacements (±1deg).
B. Sensor Prototype
The solution with a LED and four PDs arranged around
it is the basic element of the proposed F/T sensor. In order
to reduce the overall dimensions, a smaller LED (OSRAM
SFH4451) has been chosen and the PD have been arranged
onacircleofradius3mm.Thisallowstoobtainanelectronic
board of 1 cm
2
. Furthermore, to be able to measure forces
and torques along the three axes, 3 of these basic elements
have been placed on three faces of a cube.
A prototype of the sensor is shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 7.
The three boards with the opto-components are ﬁxed on the
cubic structure in the core of the sensor. A speciﬁc mask
with a hollow has been designed in order to avoid cross-
disturbances (light reﬂections) between the three boards. The
relativemotionofthemirrorsandtheboardsisachievedbyo-
ring seals, that deform in an elastic fashion when an external
force is applied.Note that by changing these elastic elements
(and in case the sensor design as well), it is possible to have
differentworking ranges (in the forcedomain)for the sensor.
The conditioning electronics is extremely simple, as usual
for optical components, and consists only in a gain resistor.
This aspect is quite important because it allows a simple
integration of the sensor in mechanically complex structure.
6410
0.01
0.011
0.012
0.013
Distance Estimation [m]
 
 
Reference
Estimation
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
?4
?2
0
2
4
x 10
?5
Time [s]
Error [m]
(a) Linear displacement.
?2
?1
0
1
2
Angle Estimation [deg]
 
 Reference
Estimation
0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5
?0.2
?0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Time [s]
Error [deg]
(b) Angular displacement.
Fig. 6. Reconstruction of linear and angular displacement using a LED
and two PDs.
The external surface of the sensor is, in this speciﬁc
prototype, a portion of a spherical surface with radius R =
21.5 mm. This particular design has been developed since
the sensor is going to be placed on the ﬁngertips of a
underwater three-ﬁngered robot gripper, [10], and both the
dimension and some of the design choices (e.g. the o-rings
for water insulation) derive from this speciﬁc application.
In particular, the overall dimension of the sensor could be
drastically reduced for other types of applications.
III. CALIBRATION AND CHARACTERIZATION
For the calibration and the experimental characterization
of the sensor, a laboratory setup has been developed, see
Fig. 8, consisting in a linear motor LinMot-37x160 equipped
with a precision load cell, and an ATI Gamma SI-130-10
F/T sensor. The linear motor is used to apply the desired
force to the optoelectronicforce sensor along the motor axis,
and is also equipped with an integrated encoder to measure
the motor position. The linear motor is driven by a low-
level control system that allows to apply the desired force
Fig. 7. Internal view of the sensor: the cube with the three electronic boards
and the cover with the mirrors.
Fig. 8. Laboratory setup for calibration and experimental validation.
proﬁle compensating for the friction acting on the motor
slider [11]. The controller and the data acquisition system
are implemented by a PC-104 with Intel ATOM processor
running the RTAI-Linux realtime OS. The software design
is performed using MatLab, Simulink and the Realtime
Workshop by a Linux workstation, that is also used as user
interface for the control and acquisition system.
A. Sensor Calibration
Thecalibrationprocedurehasbeenperformedbymounting
the prototype on the reference ATI sensor and acquiring data
from both sensors while applying a set of forces and torques.
In fact, as mentioned in Sec. II-A, being the sensor working
in the linear area and considering an elastic deformation
of the o-rings, it can be assumed that a linear function
exists between theapplied force/torquevectorw=[f
T
, m
T
]
T
and the output v of the PDs, given by w = Cv, where
C ? IR
6?12
is the calibration matrix. For this reason, the
calibration is quite simple and consists in applying a set of
force/torque vectors W = [w
1
,w
2
,...,w
n
]?IR
6?n
, measured
by the reference sensor, collecting the relative set of output
voltages V = [v
1
,v
2
,...,v
n
]? IR
12?n
, and ﬁnally computing
the calibration matrix C as
C =W V
+
being V
+
the pseudo-inverse of V. Once the calibration
matrix is obtained, the vector w of forces/torques applied
to the sensor is simply computed from the PD values v as
w =Cv. Notice that the forces are expresses in a reference
framewithorigininthecentreofthesensorandaxesdirectas
shown in Fig. 1. Because of the speciﬁc mechanical design
1
,
1
As already mentioned, the mechanical and elastic part of the sensor can
be tailored for speciﬁc applications, and therefore different performances
can be achieved if desired.
6411
?100
?50
0
50
Reference [N]
 
 
F
x
F
y
F
z
?100
?50
0
50
Estimated [N]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180
?4
?2
0
2
4
Error [N]
Time [s]
Fig. 9. Force reconstruction after calibration.
the operating range of the sensor is [0÷100] N for forces
along the z direction, and [?50÷50] N in the x?y plane,
while torques are limited to [?5÷5] Nm along the three
axes. Fig. 9 shows a test in which forces are measured by the
reference sensor and by the new sensor after calibration, and
the difference among them. From the plots, and in particular
fromtheplotofthedifference,it canbenoticedthatthereare
some “peaks” when the applied force has a sudden change.
These peaks are due to the different elastic properties of the
two sensors (the o-rings have a more evident visco-elastic
behaviour).
B. Sensor Performance
In order to fully characterize from a static and dynamic
point of view the sensor, other experiments have been per-
formed. In particular, the sensor has been installed on the
setup of Fig. 8 in order to apply precise axial forces (z
direction).
For example, Fig. 10 shows a test in which a sinusoidal
force with constant frequency (0.1 Hz) and increasing ampli-
tude is applied by the motor along the z axis. It is possible
to see an increasing error when the force gradient becomes
larger and larger. As a matter of fact, because of the visco-
elastic propertiesoftherubberused to sealthe opticalsensor,
this is ‘slower’ than the reference sensor in recovering the
unloaded position. This effect is more evident in Fig. 11
where a 20 N sinusoidal force is applied at increasing
frequencies, from 0.01 to 3 Hz. The error increases with the
frequency of the input signal.
However, it has to be pointed out that this effect is not
due to some intrinsic limitations of the basic principle of
the sensor, but rather to the particular mechanical design
employing rubber sealing.
C. Evaluation of the Friction Coefﬁcient
Another experiment is reported in and Fig. 12, where a
constantforcealongthezdirectionisappliedtoanobject.On
?100
?50
0
50
Reference [N]
 
 
F
x
F
y
F
z
?100
?50
0
50
Estimated [N]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 180 200
?5
0
5
10
Error [N]
Time [s]
Fig. 10. Application of a sinusoidal force signal with increasing amplitude
at 0.1 Hz.
?20
?10
0
10
Reference [N]
 
 
F
x
F
y
F
z
?40
?20
0
20
Estimated [N]
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
?2
0
2
4
Error [N]
Time [s]
Fig. 11. Application of a sinusoidal force signal (20 N) at increasing
frequencies.
the object, an external increasing force is applied as well (by
means of some weights) and therefore the sensor measures
both the normal (z axis) and tangential (x?y plane) forces
(f
n
, f
t
).Intheexperiment,theobjectwascoveredbyasilicon
rubber to increase friction (the surface of the sensor, built
with 3D printing technology, has a very low friction coefﬁ-
cient), and the applied tangential forces were f
t
=3,8,13,18
N, while the normal force was f
n
=30 N. Notice that with
the load of f
t
=13 N, the object starts to slide. The decrease
of the normal force f
n
when the tangential component is
f
t
= 13 N is due to the non negligible deformation of the
silicon rubber covering the object. This type of experiment
allowsalsotoestimatethefrictioncoefﬁcientµ= f
t
/f
n
andto
implement some control strategies in order to avoid slippage
of the object.
D. Characterization as Intrinsic Tactile Sensor
Among the many usages for force/tactile sensors, in the
literature it has been described by several authors how to
use them in robotic applications for the computation, besides
of applied force/torque vectors, also of the contact point
between e.g. the ﬁngers of a robot hand and the grasped
6412
0 10 20 30 40 50 60
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Time  [s]
Force [N]
tangential force normal force
?10 0 10 20
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Tangential Force [N]
Normal Force ]N]
Fig. 12. Measurement of the normal and tangential forces.
?0.02
?0.01
0
0.01
0.02
?0.02
?0.015
?0.01
?0.005
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
0
0.005
0.01
0.015
0.02
X
Y
Z
Fig. 13. Measurement of the applied forces and of the contact point.
object, see [12], [13], [14], [15]. Considering a ‘hard ﬁnger’
contact(i.e.locallyonlyforcesandnottorquescanbeapplied
at the contact), the same principle has been tested with the
new sensor. As described e.g. in [13], in case of a sensor
with spherical surface (with radius R) the position p
c
of the
contact point can be obtained from the force f and torque m
measured by the F/T sensor from
? = ?
1
kfk
s
R
2
?
kf?mk
2
kfk
4
r
0
=
f?m
kfk
2
p
c
= r
0
+?f
Since two solution are obtained from these equations (solu-
tion of the intersection of a line with a sphere), the point for
which the forceis entering the surfacemust be selected. Typ-
ical results are reported in Fig. 13, where the applied forces
are shown as lines and the contact points are measured on
the surface of the sensor. In this test, three forces are applied
at three different points, whose [x,y,z] coordinates have been
computed as [1.2, 2.1, 21.1] mm, [?1.4, 10.7, 18.1] mm
and [17.6, ?7.8, 5.4] mm, corresponding to radii of 21.2,
21.1 and 20.0 mm respectively (the radius of the spherical
surface is 21.5 mm).
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a novel force/torque sensor for robotic
application has been presented and some preliminary results
obtained with a ﬁrst prototype reported and discussed. The
sensor is based on optoelectronic components and therefore
is a low-cost, simple and reliable device. Moreover, it is
easily integrable in relatively complex devices from both
the mechanical and electronic point of view. The sensor
has been designed to be placed in the ﬁngertips of robot
grippers or hands, and the particular prototype discussed in
this paperhas been developedfor a three-ﬁngeredgripperfor
underwaterapplications.Theexperimentalresultsconﬁrmthe
satisfactory performances of the sensor, that can be used not
only for measuring the external force/torque vector applied
to it, but also as a ‘intrinsic tactile’ sensor able to determine
the position of the contact point. Activity is in progress to
characterise different elastic materials (to be used to obtain
sensors with different working ranges), to identify different
mechanical conﬁgurations, and to develop more compact
sensors for other type of applications.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle, and G. Sandini, “Tactile sensing from
humans to humanoids,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26, no. 1,
pp. 1–20, 2010.
[2] J. Heo, J. Chung, and J. Lee, “Tactile sensor arrays using ﬁber bragg
grating sensors,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 126, no. 2,
pp. 312–327, 2006.
[3] K. Kamiyama, K. Vlack, T. Mizota, H. Kajimoto, N. Kawakami,
and S. Tachi, “Vision-based sensor for real-time measuring of surface
traction ﬁelds,” Computer Graphics and Applications, IEEE, vol. 25,
no. 1, pp. 68–75, 2005.
[4] R. C. E. Torres-Jara, I. Vasilescu, “A soft touch: compliant tactile
sensors for sensitive manipulation,” in CSAIL Technical Report MIT-
CSAIL-TR-2006-014, 2006.
[5] R. R. G. Hellard, “A robust, sensitive and economical tactile sensor
for a robotic manipulator,” in Proc. of Australasian Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2002, pp. 100–104.
[6] S. Hirose and K. Yoneda, “Development of optical 6-axial force sensor
and its signal calibration considering non linear calibration,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 1, Tsukuba, Japan,
1990, pp. 46–53.
[7] G. De Maria, C. Natale, and S. Pirozzi, “Tactile sensor for human-like
manipulation,” in Proc. IEEE RAS EMBS Int. Conf. on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2012, pp. 1686–1691.
[8] A. Tarand G.Cserey, “Development ofa low cost 3doptical compliant
tactile force sensor,” in Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM),2011
IEEE/ASME International Conference on, 2011, pp. 236–240.
[9] S. Kasap, Optoelectronics and Photonics: Principles and Practices.
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2001.
[10] J. Bemﬁca, C. Melchiorri, L. Moriello, G. Palli, U. Scarcia, and
G. Vassura, “Mechatronic design of a three-ﬁngered gripper for under-
water applications,” in 6th IFAC Symposium on Mechatronic Systems,
Hangzhou, China, 2013, pp. 307–312.
[11] G. Palli and C. Melchiorri, “Velocity and disturbance observer for non-
model based load and friction compensation,” in Proc. Int. Workshop
on Advanced Motion Control, Trento, Italy, 2008, pp. 194–199.
[12] J. Salisbury, “Interpretation of contact geometries from force mea-
surements,” in Robotics and Automation. Proceedings. 1984 IEEE
International Conference on, 1984, pp. 240–247.
[13] A. Bicchi, J. Salisbury, and D. Brock, “Contact sensing from force
measurements,” International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 12,
pp. 249–262, 1990.
[14] A. Cicchetti, A. Eusebi, C. Melchiorri, and G. Vassura, “An intrinsic
tactile force sensor for robotic manipulation,” in Proc. 7th. Int. Conf.
on Advanced Robotics, ICAR’95, Sant Feliu de Guixols, Spain, 1995,
pp. 889–894.
[15] C.Melchiorri, “Tactile sensingforrobotic manipulation,” inArticulated
and Mobile Robotics for SErvices and TEchnologies (RAMSETE).
Springer, 2001, pp. 75–102.
6413
