Sensors for Micro Bio Robots via Synthetic Biology
Edward B. Steager
1
, Denise Wong
1
, Deepak Mishra
2
, Ron Weiss
2
and Vijay Kumar
1
Abstract? Microscale robots offer an unprecedented oppor-
tunity to perform tasks at resolutions approaching 1 m, but
the great majority of research to this point focuses on actuation
and control. Potential applications for microrobots can be
considerably expanded by integrating sensing, signal processing
and feedback into the system. In this work, we demonstrate
that technologies from the eld of synthetic biology may be
directly integrated into microrobotic systems to create cell-
based programmable mobile sensors, with signal processors and
memory units. Specically, we integrate genetically engineered,
ultraviolet light-sensing bacteria with magnetic microrobots,
creating the rst controllable biological microrobot that is
capable of exploring, recording and reporting on the state of the
microscale environment. We demonstrate two proof-of-concept
prototypes: (a) an integrated microrobot platform that is able to
sense biochemical signals, and (b) a microrobot platform that
is able to deploy biosensor payloads to monitor biochemical
signals, both in a biological environment. These results have
important implications for integrated micro-bio-robotic systems
for applications in biological engineering and research.
I. INTRODUCTION
Rapid fundamental progress in microrobotics has given
rise to opportunities for new applications. Due to the sim-
ilarity in length scale to single cells, microrobots enable
the investigation of microbiology in ways which were not
previously possible. Examples include manipulating and ar-
ranging single cells [1], [2], probing interactions with cells
[3], [4], and cell surgery [5]. Cells have also been used for
propulsion and control of microrobots. For instance,Serratia
marcescens has been examined as an effective actuator
for propelling microbeads and micro fabricated plates, and
swarms of magnetotactic bacteria have been employed for
delivering small payloads [6], [7], [8]. Alternatively, the
natural environmental responses of cells have been used in
motility-based biosensors, where readout is performed based
on the motility of the cells [9].
Concurrently, rapid advancements in synthetic biology
have enabled the design of cells with highly specied
functionality through genetic engineering [10]. Cells are
compelling candidates for use in micro scale systems for
two particular reasons. Firstly, biological cells are self-
contained systems which do not need an external power
source. Secondly, they have the natural ability to respond
to environmental cues, such as changes in chemical con-
centration, light exposure, and even magnetic eld orienta-
tion. This sensory framework is contained in an exquisitely
1
GRASP Laboratory, School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, U.S.A.esteager,
denwong, kumar@seas.upenn.edu
2
Synthetic Biology Center, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139 dmishra, rweiss@mit.edu
Magnetic 
Microrobot 
Integrated Distributed 
Localized UV 
Exposure 
 
Fig. 1. Biosensors. Cells engineered to sense UV radiation are attached
either directly to the Integrated magnetic microrobot (left), or attached to
Distributed passive microplates (right). The integrated approach is useful
for rapid exploration of a workspace, but cell response and readout is on
the order of hours. The distributed approach requires arrangement of several
passive sensors, but mapping can be performed more quickly due to greater
coverage.
small package, which in the case of the rod-shaped bacteria
Escherichia coli is typically 1m in diameter and 2m in
length. Given the extensive knowledge base on the genetic
and proteomic makeup of model organisms such as E:coli,
as well as rapid advances in genetic engineering, we can
extend the idea of cells being good natural candidates for
microscale biosensors to the concept of these cells being
programmable. This programmability can be extended well
beyond innate sensing capabilities. For example, synthetic
gene networks have been designed to create digital signal
processing capabilities such as cell-based memory units,
data-loggers, counters, edge detectors, and multi-input logic
circuits as well as analog processing functions such as lter-
ing and timing [11], [12], [13], [14], [15], [16]. Furthermore,
by employing existing mechanisms for quorum-sensing that
enable communication between cells, capabilities can be
extended to include population-level sensing and decision
making [17]. Combining advancements in both microrobotics
and synthetic biology is an investigative path with signicant
potential [18].
In this work, we demonstrate a microrobotic system capa-
ble of sensing environmental changes with spatial resolutions
at the scale of individual cells. We combine two technologies:
(a) the ability to create mobile microrobots using magnetic
actuation; and (b) tools from synthetic biology to create novel
biosensors. These biosensors are designed to sense low doses
of ultraviolet (UV) light. The information is stored in atoggle
switch architecture ?- a switch that allows cells to toggle
between stable states based on environmental stimuli ?-
and the information readout is performed via production of
uorescent proteins within the cell. This form of sensing is
useful for seeking potentially pathological conditions. The
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3783
UV sensor is used here as a proxy for chemical biosensors,
since it is simpler for proof-of-concept demonstrations with
UV light, and, because of the similarity in architecture, it
is not too difcult to engineer similar cells that can sense
biochemicals.
We investigate two methodologies (Figure 1) for micro-
robotic biosensing systems. The rst method, which we refer
to as an integrated system, utilizes cells directly attached to
magnetic microrobots. The integrated system enables rapid
exploration of a region, however, biosensor readout takes
considerably longer than actuation time. Thus, actuation time
is greatly restricted by readout. In the second method, which
we call a distributed system, we attach cells to microscale
plates that are then independently arranged by a single
magnetic robot. In this system, several biosensors are rapidly
arranged to cover a region. In both systems, the sensor
consists of a population of cells, whether they are attached
to the microrobot or the passive microscale plate. A single
cell is not a reliable biosensor because individual cells exhibit
stochastic behavior. However, reliable results can be obtained
for groups of cells. Fluorescence microscopy is used to read
out the response of cell populations. Specically, we show
in this paper how sensors can be transported and read out to
indicate the presence of UV radiation.
II. METHODS
A. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup consists of four in-plane electro-
magnetic coils which use magnetic eld gradients to actuate
the magnetic microrobots. The coils are integrated on the
stage of an epiuorescence microscope. The precise details
of the setup have been previous described in detail and
modeled [2].
B. Microrobot Fabrication
Microrobots are fabricated in a single-exposure process
using traditional microfabrication techniques [1]. First a layer
of 10% dextran in spin-coated on a clean glass slide, which
acts as a sacricial release layer. Next, a 2m layer of SU8-
2002 is spin-coated. This layer is necessary as a mediating
interface and enables uniform coating in the subsequent
spin-coating step. Next, SU8 mixed with 5% iron oxide
nanoparticles is spin-coated to a thickness in the range of 4-
10 m. A dark-eld photomask is used during the exposure
step, and the entire slide is then developed in PGMEA and
dried with nitrogen.
C. Fabrication of Plasmids and Strains
Plasmids pHPTa and pCIRa were derived from the pub-
lished pTAK plasmids and pZ expression vectors and pre-
viously published [11]. The plasmid pLPTa was built by
performing site-directed mutagenesis on pHPTa to change
the Glutamine at residue 233 of the cI protein to a Lysine to
confer more sensitivity to UV irradiation. Co-transformations
of pLPTa and pCIRa into E:coli strain JM2.300 yielded the
experimental strain for all data collection. The experimental
strains were cultured at 37

C in LB broth (BD Biosciences)
dextran 
glass slide 
SU8 
photomask 
 
engineered cells 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
poly-L-lysine 
Fig. 2. Biosensor Microfabrication. (a) Glass slides are coated with
dextran, which acts as a water-soluble sacricial release layer. (b) SU8
forms the substrate of the biosensor. (c-d) Biosensors are patterned with
photolithography. (e) Poly-L-lysine is deposited on the biosensor surface to
enhance attachment of cells. (f) Microrobots are released in solution and
dextran dissolves.
supplemented with appropriate levels of ampicillin and tetra-
cycline (Sigma) to maintain selection. Typically, cultures
were inoculated with appropriate selection antibiotics and
initial isopropyl-beta-thiogalactopyranoside (IPTG) to set
toggle state and grown at 37

C for 16 hours. Cells were
centrifuged and resuspended in fresh LB broth twice before
additional growth periods dependent on downstream experi-
ments.
D. Fabrication of Biosensors
Biosensors are SU8 epoxy microstructures with bacteria
adhered to the surface (Figure 2). The fabrication process is
optimized for compatibility with biological cells as well as
compatibility with traditional bright-eld and uorescence
microscopy. Initially, a water-soluble sacricial layer of
dextran is spin-coated onto a No. 0 glass slide to allow
release of biosensors in subsequent experimental steps. On
top of the dextran layer, 5-10 m thick SU8 2000 series
negative tone, photosensitive epoxy plates are fabricated
using a single exposure through a chrome mask. For this
study, a combination of 40, 60 and 80 m diameter disks
were fabricated. E:coli cells do not naturally adhere to SU8,
so the surface of the plates were treated with 0.1% poly-L-
lysine for 10 minutes, a protein which promotes binding of
biological cells. The slides were then dried with compressed
air. For SU8 experiments, following overnight cultures and
subsequent washing away of IPTG, cells were grown in
liquid LB media supplemented with appropriate antibiotics
at 37

C for 4 hours before being deposited onto poly-L-
lysine substrates and allowed to adhere for 5-10 minutes.
Excess cells were washed from the surface and biosensors
released into the experimental setup by inversion. Integrated
biosensors were treated in a similar manner.
3784
E. Flow Cytometry
Flow cytometry is used to characterize the level of u-
orescence of individual cells. For cytometry experiments,
following overnight cultures and subsequent washing away
of IPTG, cells were grown in liquid culture at 30

C for 2
hours before exposure to UV irradiation (Stratalinker UV
Crosslinker 2300) and additional growth at 30

C for 6
hours before analysis using a LSRFortessa cell analyzer (BD
Biosciences) equipped with 488-nm argon excitation laser
and 530/15 nm emission lter and a PMT setting of 360
V . Measurements were calibrated using Rainbow Calibration
Particles (Spherotech RCP-30-5A) to normalize data between
different experimental runs. For each sample, 10,000 events
were collected.
F. Microscopy and Tracking
Integrated and distributed biosensors were actuated and
positioned using bright-eld microscopy. Readout was per-
formed using uorescence at excitation/emission wave-
lengths optimized for green uorescence protein (GFP).
Although SU8 epoxy is uorescent at wavelengths close
to GFP, the emission spectra of SU8 and GFP do not
signicantly overlap.
G. UV Exposure
Cells were exposed to UV light with a mercury lamp
with collimation optics. The light source was masked to
create discrete regions of UV exposure. Exposure times of
10 seconds were sufcient to induce the population to switch
to high state, thus activating the synthetically engineered
response of producing Green Fluorescent Protein (GFP),
which is a readout for this high state.
III. LOW POWER TOGGLE CELLS
A. Biochemical Model
Bistability occurs in a genetic circuit when two repressible
promoters are arranged in a mutually inhibitory network
[11]. Promoters regulate the activity of genes that transcribe
proteins. Each promoter, p and plac, triggers a gene, lacI
and cI respectively, that regulates the production of a
protein, LacR and CI respectively, which represses the
behavior of the other promoter, Figure 3. In the absence of
inducers, two stable states are possible: (1) when promoter,
plac, transcribes the repressor protein CI (low-state,) (2)
when promoter, p, transcribes the repressor protein LacR
(high-state.) A transient, externally triggered inducer can be
used to switch between these two stable states. Hence the
name toggle switch. In this toggle switch, the inducers are
chemical inducer IPTG and UV light.
By inducing the cells with IPTG, the transcription of
protein LacR is repressed, which results in a high level of
activity of genecI and the transcription of proteinCI (low-
state), Figure 3(b). At low-state promoter p is repressed
and therefore the activity of gene lacI is low. The cells will
stay in low state even after IPTG is removed from the envi-
ronment Figure 3(c). By inducing the cells with a transient
pulse of UV light, the cell switches to high-state. UV light
  ?cI     lacI 
(a) 
 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
 
 
(d) 
 
 
 
 
(e) 
?cI lacI 
plac p? 
?cI lacI 
plac p? 
?cI lacI 
plac p? 
?cI lacI 
plac p? 
?cI lacI 
plac p? 
IPTG 
UV 
?CI         
  ?cI     lacI 
  ?cI     lacI 
  ?cI     lacI 
  ?cI     lacI 
Fig. 3. Schematic showing gene circuit under different inducers and the
corresponding activity of genescI and lacI. (a) No inducer, basal levels of
activity of both genes, (b) Induction with IPTG reduces activity of lacI and
increases activity ofcI, (c) Low-state, even after IPTG is removed the cell
is stable in low-state, (d) Induction with UV light causes the degradation of
protein CI and increases activity of lacI, and is linked to GFP production
(e) High-state, even after the UV light is removed the cell is stable in high-
state.
causes repairable DNA-damage wherein the DNA becomes
single-stranded, this activates an SOS-pathway and causes
degradation of the protein CI Figure 3(d). The degradation
of protein CI alleviates the repression of promoter p,
increases the activity of gene lacI and hence the transcription
of protein LacR. This protein represses the promoter plac and
therefore the activity of genecI is low, Figure 3(e). In order
to detect that a cell is at high state, transcription of green
uorescent protein (GFP) is synthetically engineered to be
triggered by the transcription of the protein LacR. Thus, GFP
transcription occurs in parallel with LacR transcription and
is used as a signal indicating a cell is at high-state during
experiments.
While bistable systems occurs naturally in biology, most
are difcult to interface with as the inducers are not easily
controlled externally and states are difcult to determine
externally as well. The specic sensor cell used in the exper-
iments described here are E:coli JM2.300 cells synthetically
engineered to include plasmids pLPTa and pCIRa. Plasmids
are circular DNA molecules separate from the chromosomal
DNA within the cell that carries a few genes that can be
expressed within the cell. Plasmid pCIRa carries the genes
for GFP production which is used as a reporter for high-
state[19]. Plasmid pLPT is the regulatory circuit that contains
the genes cI and lacI and controls the expression of GFP
in plasmid pCIRa.
3785
Concentration of Species
Time
 
 
UV Induction
LacR
? CI
Fig. 4. Mathematical model of the toggle switch dynamics. Transition
between low-state where protein CI is abundant and represses the tran-
scription of protein LacR and high-state when protein LacR is abundant
and represses the transcription of protein CI. The time scale for the case
in this work is on the order of hours.
B. Mathematical Model
The interactions between the components in the genetic
toggle circuit can be described by a pair of coupled dimen-
sionless nonlinear differential equations [11]:
dU
dt
=

1
1+V

 U ;
dV
dt
=

2
1+U

 V
where U is the concentration of repressor protein LacR,
V is the concentration of repressor protein CI, 
1
is the
effective rate of synthesis of repressor protein LacR, 
2
is
the effective rate of synthesis of repressor protein CI,  is
the cooperativity of repression of promoter p and  is the
cooperativity of promoter plac.
Figure 4 illustrates the interactions between levels of
proteinsCI and LacR. The start of the graph shows the cell
in low-state after IPTG induction when the level of protein
CI is high and level of protein LacR is low. The grey region
indicates UV induction, this is modeled by decreasing the
effective rate of synthesis of repressor protein CI, 
2
, and
decreasing the cooperativity of repression of promoter, p.
Increasing the effective rate of synthesis of repressor protein
LacR, 
1
, has a similar effect. UV induction causes a sharp
change in the levels of each protein which destabilizes the
high CI state and drives the system to switch to the other
stable state where the level of proteinCI is low and the level
of protein LacR is high and as a result GFP is expressed.
While the UV light exposure is transient, the effects of the
induction are lasting and therefore the induction process
extends beyond the duration of the UV light exposure.
Stochasticity in this system arises from the combination
of bistable architecture with bimolecular processes involving
few molecules [20]. This results in bimodal population
distributions despite the same experimental conditions and
induction levels. It has been shown that even a single-
molecule event may trigger such phenotype switching [21].
Therefore, reading the uorescence signal from multiple cells
is important.
C. Cell Validation
Engineered cells need to be designed, tested and veried
in liquid or agar cultures before integrating them with
microrobots and sensor plates. Cells in JM2.300 background
harboring both plasmids pCIRa and pLPTa as described in
Fig. 5. Flow cytometry analysis of engineered bacterial cells. Cells in
JM2.300 background harboring both pCIRa and pLPTa exposed to 50
J/cm
2
UV irradiation. Initially, a homogenous population shows basal
levels of uorescence (black). The split population is then given or not
given UV input and monitored after 6 hours with the exposed cells
having a median uorescence of 1030 A.U. and unexposed cells having
a median uorescence of 106 A.U., an approximately 10-fold increase in
GFP uorescence.
the methods were rst tested and analyzed in a robot-free
environment. Bulk cultures of the genetically engineered
cells were grown to stationary phase over 16 hours at 37

C in
the presence of IPTG. The introduction of IPTG set the cells
into a state of high cI and low LacR with a basal level of GFP
uorescence. The IPTG was subsequently washed out and
cells were grown in exponential phase for 3-4 cell divisions
(2 hours at 30

C). The culture was split into two aliquots,
and one was exposed to 50J/cm
2
UV irradiation. The two
independent cultures were then grown for an additional 9-
12 cell divisions (6 hours at 30

C) and analyzed by ow
cytometry. For cells exposed to UV irradiation compared to
cells that did not receive any UV irradiation, there is an
approximately 10-fold increase of uorescence in the GFP
channel (Figure 5).
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Biosensor Transport
Biosensors are pushed in uid using a magnetic robot
(Figure 6). The sensor height should be a minimum of 5m
so that the magnetic microrobot properly engages the edge
of the biosensor for positioning. Microrobots transport 40-80
m diameter biosensors of all sizes at speeds ranging from 0
to roughly 10m/s, despite the relatively signicant viscous
shear between the disk-shaped biosensor and the substrate.
This process may be performed autonomously using visual
feedback, as demonstrated in previous work [2].
B. Sensor Response
To replicate the appropriate cellular response after trans-
ferring cells between labs, as well as to characterize the UV
response on the experimental apparatus used for magnetic
actuation, cells were again characterized for UV exposure
dose in liquid culture. The response is dramatic for UV
exposure times of approximately 10 s as observed using
uorescence microscopy (Figure 7). It should be noted that
3786
( c)
( b)
( a)
Fig. 6. Transport of biosensor substrates. (a-c) An 80 m SU8 plate
is approached from the left, engaged, and transported. Biosensors are
individually distributed in this fashion.
0"s" 10"s"
Fig. 7. Low power toggle cells in low vs high states at 40 magnication.
(Left) With no exposure to UV , the bulk of the population of cells stay
remain in the low state (non uorescent), however a small number of cells
do express GFP. (Right) 10 s exposure to UV light induces cells to switch to
high state, thus expressing GFP, but the expression of sufcient uorescence
for read out takes several hours. The high state image is taken 12 hours after
exposure (induction).
exposure times much greater than 10 s cause cell death,
which is an expected outcome. It was not assumed that cells
would respond as designed upon attachment to biosensors.
The attachment of cells to substrates or to the poly-L-
lysine interface was anticipated to be a potential disruption
to proper operation of the designed circuit. However, the
cellular response is largely preserved for the conditions of
the experiment. We did nd that exposure conditions were
affected by experimental apparatus. Microscope optics and
lab ware such as Petri dish lids act as lters at the UV
wavelengths that trigger the toggle switch.
As shown in Figures 8 and 9, GFP response is strong after
12 hrs, although not all cells switch to high state, which is
observed as uorescence. Even in an unexposed population
of cells, there is a small subpopulation of cells in high state.
Therefore, larger sensors give a more reliable readout of UV
exposure due to the larger number of attached cells. The
smallest sensors only have a few high state cells for the
cell densities achieved in these experiments, and it should
be considered that there is a signicant chance that readings
from small sets of total cells (5-10) may result in incorrect
determination of UV exposure.
For the integrated system, where low power toggle cells
40 mm 
60 mm 
80 mm 
Exposed (On) Unexposed(Off) Diameter 
Fig. 8. Sensor readout. Exposed sensors exhibit higher mean uorescence
with signicantly higher numbers of cells in high state. Unexposed sensors
still include a small population of uorescing cells, which is an example of
biological stochasticity. Thus, larger sensors give more reliable readout due
to the higher number of cells.
40 60 80
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
Biosensor Diameter [µm]
Fluorescence Intensity
 
 
Exposed
Unexposed
Fig. 9. Mean uorescence intensity averaged across several distributed
sensor micro plates. Exposed sensors have signicantly higher mean uo-
rescence intensity in comparison to unexposed sensors.
Read%out)
(a))
(b))
Fig. 10. Integrated biosensing microrobots. (a) Magnetic microrobots are
driven through a region of interest. Scale bar is 40 m. (b) Cells attached
in high state. Robot outline is indicated by dashed lines.
are directly attached to the microrobot, a workspace may
be traversed in a matter of seconds (Figure 10). However,
expression of uorescence takes several hours after exposure
to UV light. Thus, mapping spatial location to the region of
UV exposure is ambiguous, unless the robot is moved on
a time scale matching readout. For the distributed system,
collection and arrangement of biosensors takes minutes, and
3787
GFP$Channel$
(a)$
(b)$
Fig. 11. Distributed biosensors. (a) Six sensors are distributed to cover
six division of a workspace, as delineated with dashed gray lines. (b) High
state cells attached to the sampled biosensor indicate exposure to UV light.
Scale bar is 40 m.
the position of the sensors are spatially correlated with UV
exposure. As shown in Figure 11, distributed biosensors
are collected and arranged with the microrobot so that six
divisions of the workspace are occupied by sensors. Current
work in synthetic biology is targeted at greatly reducing the
time required for readout, which would greatly enhance the
practicality of these systems.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we demonstrated the integration of micro-
robotic actuation techniques with engineered cells to create
mobile biosensors. For this proof-of-concept prototype, we
used cells that were programmed to respond to and report
on exposure to UV light. This is the rst time low power
toggle cells have been attached as biosensors on to robots, a
signicant achievement that promises a pathway for transi-
tioning research in synthetic biology to robotics. This means
that cells that can serve as chemical sensors, data-loggers, or
quorum sensors can also be incorporated into such systems.
Thus advances in synthetic biology offer many techniques
to integrate new capabilities into cells and microrobots, and
provide an alternative path to microfabricating organic signal
processors, power sources, and memory units.
While the results of this study are promising and sug-
gest many exciting bridges between synthetic biology and
robotics, there are several practical considerations. In most
conventional robotic systems the characteristic time scales
for sensing, processing and actuation are matched allowing
for closed loop feedback control and motion planning. In
our prototype systems, biosensors prove to be the bottleneck.
The characteristic time for genetic regulation is of the order
of minutes and that for cell division is of the order of
tens of minutes. However, as seen in Figure 11, it is clear
that a single robot can be used to place tens or even
hundreds of sensors in targeted location enabling cell-specic
measurements in samples of biological tissue. This points to
an exciting direction for future research.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We gratefully acknowledge the support of ONR grants
N00014-07-1-0829 and N00014-11-1-0725, and the UPS
Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] M. S. Sakar, E. B. Steager, D. H. Kim, M. J. Kim, G. J. Pappas, and
V . Kumar, ?Single cell manipulation using ferromagnetic composite
microtransporters,? Applied Physics Letters, vol. 96, p. 043705, 2010.
[2] E. B. Steager, M. S. Sakar, C. Magee, M. Kennedy, A. Cowley, and
V . Kumar, ?Automated biomanipulation of single cells using magnetic
microrobots,? The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32,
no. 3, pp. 346?359, 2013.
[3] M. Sakar, S. Schurle, S. Erni, F. Ullrich, J. Pokki, D. Frutiger,
O. Ergeneman, B. Kratochvil, and B. Nelson, ?Non-contact, 3d
magnetic biomanipulation for in vivo and in vitro applications,? in
Optomechatronic Technologies (ISOT), 2012 International Symposium
on. IEEE, 2012, pp. 1?2.
[4] E. B. Steager, B. Zerne, M. S. Sakar, V . Muzykantov, and V . Kumar,
?Assessment of protein binding with magnetic microrobots in uid,?
in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2013.
[5] L. Feng, M. Hagiwara, A. Ichikawa, and F. Arai, ?On-chip enucleation
of bovine oocytes using microrobot-assisted ow-speed control,? Mi-
cromachines, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 272?285, 2013.
[6] S. Martel, C. Tremblay, S. Ngakeng, and G. Langlois, ?Controlled ma-
nipulation and actuation of micro-objects with magnetotactic bacteria,?
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 89, 2006.
[7] B. Behkam and M. Sitti, ?Bacterial agella-based propulsion and
on/off motion control of microscale objects,? Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 90, 2007.
[8] M. S. Sakar, E. B. Steager, D. H. Kim, A. A. Julius, M. J. Kim,
V . Kumar, and G. J. Pappas, ?Modeling, control and experimental
characterization of microbiorobots,? International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 30, pp. 647?658, 2011.
[9] E. B. Steager, M. S. Sakar, D. H. Kim, V . Kumar, G. J. Pappas, and
M. J. Kim, ?Electrokinetic and optical control of bacterial micro-
robots,? Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 21,
p. 035001, 2011.
[10] P. E. Purnick and R. Weiss, ?The second wave of synthetic biology:
from modules to systems,? Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology,
vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 410?422, 2009.
[11] T. S. Gardner, C. R. Cantor, and J. J. Collins, ?Construction of a
genetic toggle switch in Escherichia coli,? Nature, vol. 403, pp. 339?
342, 2000.
[12] K. Rinaudo, L. Bleris, R. Maddamsetti, S. Subramanian, R. Weiss, and
Y . Benenson, ?A universal rnai-based logic evaluator that operates in
mammalian cells,? Nature biotechnology, vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 795?801,
2007.
[13] A. E. Friedland, T. K. Lu, X. Wang, D. Shi, G. Church, and J. J.
Collins, ?Synthetic gene networks that count,? science, vol. 324, no.
5931, pp. 1199?1202, 2009.
[14] J. J. Tabor, H. M. Salis, Z. B. Simpson, A. A. Chevalier, A. Levskaya,
E. M. Marcotte, C. A. V oigt, and A. D. Ellington, ?A synthetic genetic
edge detection program,? Cell, vol. 137, no. 7, pp. 1272?1281, 2009.
[15] T. K. Lu, A. S. Khalil, and J. J. Collins, ?Next-generation synthetic
gene networks,? Nature biotechnology, vol. 27, no. 12, pp. 1139?1150,
2009.
[16] T. Ellis, X. Wang, and J. J. Collins, ?Diversity-based, model-guided
construction of synthetic gene networks with predicted functions,?
Nature biotechnology, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 465?471, 2009.
[17] L. Weiss, J. Badalamenti, L. Weaver, A. Tascone, P. Weiss, T. Richard,
and P. Cirino, ?Engineering motility as a phenotypic response to luxi/r-
dependent quorum sensing in escherichia coli,? Biotechnology and
Bionengineering, vol. 100, pp. 1251?1255, 2008.
[18] M. S. Sakar, E. B. Steager, D. H. Kim, A. A. Julius, M. J. Kim,
V . Kumar, and G. J. Pappas, ?Biosensing and actuation for mi-
crobiorobots,? in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, Anchorage, AL, 2010, pp. 3141?3146.
[19] H. Kobayashi, M. K¾rn, M. Araki, K. Chung, T. S. Gardner, C. R.
Cantor, and J. J. Collins, ?Programmable cells: interfacing natural and
engineered gene networks,? Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America, vol. 101, no. 22, pp. 8414?
8419, 2004.
[20] A. Novick and M. Weiner, ?Enzyme induction as an all-or-none
phenomenon,? Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences,
vol. 43, pp. 553?566, 1957.
[21] P. J. Choi, L. Cai, K. Frieda, and X. S. Xie, ?A stochastic single-
molecule event triggers phenotype switching of a bacterial cell,?
Science, vol. 322, p. 442, 2008.
3788
