MIT Leak Detector: An In-Pipe Leak Detection Robot
Dimitris Chatzigeorgiou, You Wu, Kamal Youcef-Toumi and Rached Ben-Mansour
Abstract—In this work we present a new in-pipe leak
detection robot, the MIT Leak Detector. The system performs
autonomous leak detection in gas pipes in a reliable and robust
fashion. Detection in based on the presence of a pressure
gradient in the neighborhood of the leak. As the MIT Leak
Detector travels through pipes, it picks up the pressure gradient
in case of leaks via a carefully designed detector. In this work
we demonstrate the performance of the system in a lab setup,
which consists of 100mm ID pipes containing pressurized air.
I. INTRODUCTION
Losses through leaks represent a signiﬁcant portion of
the water supply, hence identiﬁcation and elimination of
leaks is imperative to efﬁcient water resource management.
In addition to water losses there are thousands of miles of
natural gas and oil pipelines around the globe that are poorly
maintained. Thus, a signiﬁcant portion of the total oil and
natural gas production is lost through leakage annually.
In this work we introduce a new complete system for
the reliable sensing of leaks in gas pipes. The system is
able to autonomously inspect the network and send signals
wirelessly via relay stations to a computer. Leak signals stand
out clearly on occurrence of leaks, via a smart mechanism
[1], [2], that eliminates the need for user experience. The
detector is based on identifying a clear pressure gradient in
the vicinity of leaks [3] in pressurized pipes.
II. THE MIT LEAK DETECTOR
The MIT Leak Detector is designed to operate in 4”
(100mm) ID gas pipes. The system consists of two mod-
ules, namely the carrier and the detector (Fig. 1). The
carrier assures the locomotion of the system inside the pipe.
The module is carrying actuators, sensors, power and also
electronics for signal processing and communications. The
module’s locomotion is materialized via a pair of traction
wheels. On the other hand, the detection concept is based
on the fact that any leakage in a pipeline alters the pressure
and ﬂow ﬁeld of the working medium. More speciﬁcally, the
detection principle is based on identifying the existence of a
localized pressure gradient [3]. In addition, the phenomenon
is independent of pipe size and/or material. It also remains
relatively insensitive to ﬂuid medium inside the pipes, which
makes the detection method widely applicable (gas, oil, water
pipes, etc).
Dimitris Chatzigeorgiou and You Wu are with the Mechatronics Re-
search Lab, Mechanical Engineering Dept., MIT. Kamal Youcef-Toumi
is with Faculty of Mechanical Engineering Dept. and also the director
of the Mechatronics Research Lab, MIT. fdchatzis, youwu,
youcefg@mit.edu
R. Ben-Mansour is with Faculty of Mechanical Engineering Dept.,
KFUPM. rmansour@kfupm.edu.sa
Carrier Module Detector
4''
y
z
[Top]
[Bottom]
Fig. 1. Side view of the MIT Leak Detector. [Top]: Solid Model. A
pipe section (4”) is drawn for reference. [Bottom]: The actual developed
prototype inside a 4” pipe.
In the attached video we present the MIT Leak Detector
operating in our compressed air pipe setup. More speciﬁcally,
different cases are presented, where we run the system under
different speeds and leak conﬁgurations and evaluate its
performance. Data is transmitted wirelessly to a host-PC and
the user is able to see the identiﬁcation and localization of
one or multiple leaks in real-time. In all cases the pressure
in the pipe was regulated to be 0.7 bar.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the King Fahd University
of Petroleum and Minerals in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, for
funding the research reported in this paper through the Center
for Clean Water and Clean Energy at MIT and KFUPM under
Project Number R7-DMN-08.
The ﬁrst author would like to thank the Onassis Public
Beneﬁt Foundation for the award of a prestigious scholarship
throughout this work.
REFERENCES
[1] Chatzigeorgiou D., Wu Y ., Youcef-Toumi K. and Ben Mansour R.,
“Reliable sensing of leaks in pipelines,” ASME Dynamic Systems and
Controls Conference (DSCC), 2013.
[2] Chatzigeorgiou D., Ben-Mansour R., Khalifa A. and Youcef-Toumi K.,
“Design and evaluation of an in-pipe leak detection sensing technique
based on force transduction,” ASME International Mechanical Engi-
neering Congress & Exposition (IMECE2012), 2012.
[3] Ben-Mansour R, M.A. Habib, A. Khalifa, K. Youcef-Toumi and D.
Chatzigeorgiou, “A computational ﬂuid dynamic simulation of small
leaks in water pipelines for direct leak pressure transduction,”Computer
and Fluids, p. doi:10.1016/j.compﬂuid.2011.12.016, 2012.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2091
