Pitch and Yaw Control of a Robotic Insect using an Onboard
Magnetometer
E. Farrell Helbling, Sawyer B. Fuller, and Robert J. Wood
Abstract—The Harvard RoboBee was the ﬁrst ﬂy-sized
vehicle to lift its own weight. This vehicle has previously
demonstrated controlled ﬂight maneuvers, but this required
an array of external cameras to precisely track its trajectory.
Developing ﬂight-worthy sensors to eliminate the need for
externalmotioncaptureisanareaofactivestudy.Inthispaper,
we consider an onboard analog magnetometer. We show that
the sensor meets the size, weight, and power requirements for
the RoboBee and can provide feedback on angular position
for pitch and yaw angle control. We show that this sensor
can provide an accurate angle reading despite proximity to the
piezoelectric actuators of this vehicle. This is likely because
the actuators are driven by electrostatic forces rather than
the electromagnetic forces that drive the electric motors of
larger aircraft. This sensor provided sufﬁcient bandwidth to
enablerapidpitchanglemaneuverswithin200msonaRoboBee
constrained to rotate only about its pitch axis. We also show it
operating in a feedback loop to control heading angle, the ﬁrst
demonstration of controlling yaw orientation at this scale.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Harvard RoboBee (Fig. 1) presents many unique
engineering design and control challenges because the low
mass of the system (50–500mg) and centimeter-scale require
careful consideration of size, weight, and power for each
component. The RoboBee is the ﬁrst ﬂapping-wing micro-
air vehicle (FWMAV) under one gram to demonstrate con-
trolled ﬂight under external power [1]. Previous work has
demonstratedcontrolledtakeoff,hovering,lateralmaneuvers,
and landing [2]; however, in these ﬂights, external motion
capture cameras (Vicon) were used to determine the position
and orientation of the robot. In order to attain autonomous
ﬂight, sensors need to be integrated into the robot for both
proprioception and exteroception.
Previous studies have focused on biomimetic sensor pack-
ages for FWMAV, [3] [4]. Recent work has demonstrated
a number of these biomimetic sensors integrated on the
RoboBee including optical ﬂow [5], ocelli and antennae
[6], with demonstrations of altitude and pitch control. Re-
searchers have also determined that insects determine orien-
tation with magnetoreception [7] and polarization [8]. This
kind of feedback may prove beneﬁcial for similarly-sized
robots for navigation or ﬂight stabilization. To determine the
ﬁnal combination of sensors that will be equipped on the
RoboBee, each sensor needs to be characterized – analyzing
the power requirements, weight, output rate, resolution, and
noisesensitivity.Inthiswork,wediscussthecharacterization
The authors are with the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences,
Harvard University, Cambridge MA 02138 USA and the Wyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston MA 02115,
USA ehelbling@seas.harvard.edu
Fig. 1. Photo of the Harvard RoboBee attached to a wire to allow rotation
about the yaw axis and prevent motion about pitch and roll. Clips are added
to the top and bottom of the robot for attachment. The sensor is mounted
to the anterior of the robot.
of a commercial anisotropic magnetoresistive (AMR) sensor.
We demonstrate that it is capable of providing feedback to
control motions about pitch and yaw of a RoboBee while
constrained on a wire.
II. MAGNETORESISTIVE SENSORS
The magnetoresistive effect was ﬁrst discovered in ferro-
magnetic materials in the mid-19th century [9]. This material
property allows the magnetic ﬁeld to be measured by detect-
ing changes in resistance. Sensors that utilize magnetoresis-
tance for absolute angle control have become more common
since the discovery of the giant magnetoresistive (GMR)
effect [10] [11]. The large change in resistance (5–80%) [12]
lends itself to more sensitive applications than AMR sensors
which have a 2–5% resistance change [13]. Widely used by
IBM as a low-ﬁeld angle detector in the spin valve magnetic
read heads of computer hard drives [14], these sensors have
also proven useful in navigation [15] and current detection
[16]. Magnetometers are not typically used in unmanned
aerial vehicle (UAV) applications due to the local magnetic
ﬁelds generated by onboard motors. The RoboBee, however,
is driven by piezoelectric actuators, which have not been
shown to generate magnetic ﬁelds because of their high
voltages and low currents [17]. Though GMR sensors have
a wide detection range, approximately 1– 10
8
Ga [18], this
detection range falls outside of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld
range of 1–500mGa, so we consider AMR sensors in this
work.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5516
TABLE I
SPECIFICATIONS OF THE HMC1043
Characteristic Typical Value
Area 3? 3 mm
Height 1.4 mm
Mass 22 mg
Magnetic Field Range ± 6 Ga
Resolution 2 mGa, 0.4% of Earth’s Field
Sensitivity 1 mV/V/Ga
Power 3 V, 5 mA
Bandwidth 5 MHz
A. AMR Sensor
In current uses of AMR technology, a thin permalloy
(nickel-iron) ﬁlm is deposited on silicon, which allows the
sensors to be rapidly manufactured and used in integrated
circuits [18]. The permalloy is cut into resistive strips and
exposed to a high magnetic ﬁeld to pre-align the magnetic
ﬁelds of each resistor for high sensitivity. The resistors are
thenconﬁguredinaWheatstonebridgetodetectthedirection
and magnitude of a magnetic ﬁeld along an axis.
In this work we characterize the Honeywell HMC1043
[19]. The dimensions, low mass, and moderate power con-
sumption of the sensor are small enough for integration onto
the RoboBee (Fig. 1) [20]. The detection range indicates that
the sensor can accurately detect the magnitude and direction
of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld. Finally the high bandwidth is
sufﬁcient to produce low latency orientation information (see
Table I for a full list of speciﬁcations).
B. Interface
In the presence of an applied magnetic ﬁeld, the change
in resistance can be measured by taking the difference of
the two outputs of the bridge circuit. With a sensitivity of
1 mV/V/Ga, in the presence of the Earth’s magnetic ﬁeld
(approximately 1Ga) and with a supplied voltage of 3V, the
signal from the magnetometer varies by approximately 3
mV/V/Ga. Using two ganged off board ampliﬁers (LMV344
and LM741) and standard passive components, this signal is
ampliﬁed by 1,000 to provide a range of 3.3 – 7.3 V with
a resolution of 1.5V/rad, compatible with the input voltage
range of 0 – 10V of our data acquisition system.
III. PITCH CONTROL
We investigated the extent to which the signal was dis-
rupted by the piezo actuators, the vibration induced by
ﬂapping wings and whether the noise level was low enough
to function in a fast feedback loop.
A. Calibration
We attached the sensor to a rotating axle whose angle is
measured by a potentiometer that is connected to the end of
the axle as described in [6] (Fig. 2). As the device was ro-
tated, the voltage signal from the sensor varied in proportion
to the magnetic ﬁeld strength along the z-component of the
normal vector of the sensor according to:
potentiometer
angle reading
?
magnetometer
?
0°
?1
?2
Front View
B
Perspective View
B
Fig.2. (left):Calibratingthemagnetometer.Themagnetometer(green)was
attached to a rotating axle whose angular position could be measured with
a potentiometer. The angular position was recorded simultaneously with the
signal from the magnetometer. The magnetic ﬁeld vector is shown in blue,
and is represented as an angle greater than the expected geomagnetic ﬁeld
vector due to the effect of nearby equipment. (right): A visualization of the
planar projection of vectors and angles used in calibration.
?2.5 ?2 ?1.5 ?1 ?0.5 0 0.5 1 1.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
5.5
6
6.5
7
7.5
Angle (Radians)
Magnetometer Signal (Volts)
 
 
Fig. 3. Example calibration plot from the magnetometer. The measured
angle in radians is along the x-axis and voltage signal from the sensor is
along the y-axis. The raw signal from the magnetometer (blue) and the ﬁtted
curve (red) are plotted against the measured angle in radians.
(1)
V = V
0
+k
 !
B · ˆ n
= V
0
+k|B|cos(? 2
  ? 1
)
where V
0
is the initial offset of the voltage signal from
the magnetometer after ampliﬁcation, k is a proportionality
constant that incorporates the change in resistivity of the
permalloy and subsequent ampliﬁcation,
 !
B represents the
magnetic ﬁeld, ˆ n is the unit normal vector of the measured
axis of the sensor, ? 2
is the angle from
 !
B to horizontal
(inclination), and ? 1
is the measured elevation of the magne-
tometer (Fig. 2). In the above equation, both the magnitude
and direction of the magnetic ﬁeld are unknown. Using (1),
we calibrated the sensor with three parameters, using the
MATLAB ‘ﬁt’ command and specifying the ﬁt type as:
y = acos(x+b)+c (2)
The sensor was rotated on the axle through 180
  , from
60
  to -120
  , encompassing the expected operation range
of about 90
  (±45
  tilt angle). Because both phase and
5517
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
ab c
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
ab c
?2 ?1 0 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
?2 ?1 0 1
3
4
5
6
7
8
0 2 4 6 8 10
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
0 2 4 6 8 10
0.92
0.94
0.96
0.98
1
1.02
1.04
Parameter Variability
Magnetometer Signal (Volts)
Parameters
Angle (Radians) Time (Hours)
Time (Minutes)
Normalized Parameter Estimates
A
B
C
D E F
Fig. 4. A and D show the variability of parameters in the ﬁt y = acos(x+b)+c (median and 25
th
–75
th
percentiles) for ten tests, normalized by the
mean. For clarity, the ten ﬁts are plotted in B and E as a visualization of this spread. To visualize the drift in the parameter values, a (blue), b (green), c
(red) are plotted with time. A, B and C display variability over ten minutes, while D, E, and F display variability over ten hours.
magnitudeareunknownintheﬁt,thesensorhadtoberotated
throughalargerrangetocaptureoneofthemaximumsofthe
sinusoidal ﬁt. The magnetometer signal was plotted against
the angles determined by the potentiometer and ﬁt to the
calibration constants. Fig. 3 demonstrates a typical ﬁtting.
Themaximumofthesinusoidalﬁtwasmeasuredtobe  99
  ,
an inclination angle larger than that of the geomagnetic
ﬁeld (-67
  at a latitude of 42
  N). This indicates that the
magnetometer is measuring an artiﬁcial ﬁeld due to the local
effects of nearby equipment.
In order to characterize the robustness of the sensor,
calibrationdatawererecordedoverthecourseofaday.Fig.4
displays two experiments with measured data over the course
of ten minutes (Fig. 4A, 4B, & 4C) and ten hours (Fig. 4D,
4E, & 4F). We calibrated the sensor once a minute every
ten minutes to determine how quickly the measured signal
from the magnetometer would change in a relatively short
period of time. As can be seen in Fig. 4A, 75% of the data
for the amplitude (a) and the offset (c) fall within 1% of
the mean. For the phase (b), which has a noticeably larger
spread, 75% of the data falls within 4% of the mean. Using
our ﬁt parameters, the variability we measured suggests that
the sensor can accurately determine the angle to within 2
  .
The parameters vary more noticeably over the course of ten
hours(Fig.4E).However,75%ofthedataforeachparameter
iswithin4%ofthemean(Fig.4D).AscanbeseeninFig.4C
& 4F, there is no trend in the parameter estimates over time,
indicating that the largest source of error is not the internal
characteristics of the sensor, but rather external shifts in the
applied magnetic ﬁeld.
In addition to the presence of an unpredictable magnetic
ﬁeld signal, the largest source of deviation from the mean is
due to the wire leading to the sensor. The sensor’s signal is
carried through thin copper wire to two off board ampliﬁers.
This introduces noise into the system, and contact with the
signal wires can cause large variations in measured signal
at the last ampliﬁcation stage. To minimize this effect, the
ampliﬁers should be added onboard the robot to diminish
some of the noise in the system.
Fig. 3 and Fig. 4 show a monotonic ﬁt through a tilt
angle of ±60
  . With a signal range of approximately 3V and
measured standard deviation of 12mV, as well as accuracy
within 2
  , the uncertainty in lateral position for a hovering
RoboBee using this sensor and gains in [2] would be ±4cm.
B. Absolute Angle Control
We attached the sensor to the underside of the robot (Fig.
5),whichwasthenmountedonawirethatlimitedthemotion
to only the pitch axis (see Fig. 6 for axis convention). We
applied a ﬁxed amplitude and frequency to the wings of
300V and 90Hz, respectively. In order to generate a pitch
torque,the meanstrokeangleis variedbyadjusting the mean
voltage of the sinusoid that drives the wings [21]. We were
able to design a feedback loop that would change the mean
voltage of the sinusoid based on the measured angle of the
magnetometer. Inside the feedback loop was a PD controller
that was based on the estimated rotational moment of inertia
of the robot [6]:
u(t)= K
P
(? m
(t)  ? d
(t))+K
D
d
dt
(? m
(t)  ? d
(t)) (3)
whereu(t)isthecommandedpitchtorque,K
P
isthepropor-
tionalgain, ? m
isthemeasuredanglefromthemagnetometer,
5518
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
?1
?0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
Time (Seconds)
Yaw Angle (Radians)
Fig. 9. Absolute Angle control of the yaw axis of the RoboBee. The desired angle (red) is plotted alongside the raw magnetometer signal (green), and
the Vicon signal (blue).
small component in the x-y plane. As the direction of the
magnetic ﬁeld is aligned with the axis of rotation during
these yaw experiments, the signal through 120
  varied by
only 0.1V, too low for control about the yaw axis. We
therefore created a magnetic ﬁeld with neodymium magnets
(K&J Magnetics, Inc., Pipersville, PA USA) grade N42
with a surface magnetic ﬁeld of 5,248Ga [23]. Separated
by a distance of 12 cm the magnetic ﬁeld strength at the
magnetometeristheoretically247mGa,withanin-planeﬁeld
strengthof165mGa–wellwithinthesensitivityrangeofthe
sensor (Table I). The magnets were also oriented at an angle
of approximately 45
  from vertical to ensure a sufﬁcient
resolution as the sensor is rotated about yaw.
A. Calibration
We mounted the sensor to the anterior of the robot and
attached the robot to a vertical wire that allowed vertical
ﬂight and rotation about the yaw axis, but prevented lateral
ﬂight and rotation about the pitch and roll axes (Fig. 1).
Signals from the magnetometer were taken simultaneously
with orientation information from Vicon that tracked reﬂec-
tive markers mounted to the robot as it rotated around the
wire. The magnetometer signal and orientation information
are plotted in Fig. 8. The signal was ﬁtted with the three
calibration parameters from equation (2); an example ﬁt can
be seen in red plotted over the raw magnetometer data in
Fig. 8. Through 180
  , the voltage signal had a range of
approximately 800mV, with a measured standard deviation
of 12mV; the resolution for these experiments is lower with
an accuracy of 10
  (0.17 radians). Given the controller and
gain in [2], this uncertainty would cause the error in lateral
position of around ±4cm in hovering ﬂights because of the
inability to distinguish between pitch and roll directions.
Because of the position of the magnets, the sensor signal is
monotonic between -30
  and 150
  , so we chose trajectories
that fell in that range. We found that the robot had an
equilibrium point on the wire around 45
  , due to a slight
inclination in the vertical guide wire and the presence of the
tether.
B. Absolute Angle Control
The piezoelectric actuators were driven with a ﬁxed volt-
age amplitude of 80V and a ﬂapping frequency of 120Hz.
Yaw torques are generated with split-cycle ﬂapping, leading
toasymmetricvelocitiesthatresultinasymmetricdragforces
on the wings [21] [22]. Electrically, the sinusoidal signal
variestherisetimeofonewingandvariesthefalltimeofthe
other wing by adjusting the fraction of the second harmonic
in the signal while maintaining peak to peak amplitude. How
much this rise and fall time differ bilaterally determines the
amount of torque applied to the body. The magnetometer
signal was integrated into a feedback loop with a PD
controller to adjust the fraction of second harmonic in the
signal driving each wing. Using the PD control law (3) with
measured and desired yaw angles to command yaw torque,
we hand-tuned the gains for this speciﬁc experiment. Due to
the larger noise range measured during heading calibration,
thegainofthederivativetermcouldnotbeincreased,making
the system underdamped.
Fig. 9 shows the results of a trial in which the magnetome-
ter served as a sensor in a feedback loop to control yaw.
The magnetometer can track the motion capture estimate,
with a mean error of 0.10 radians. The maximum error
between motion capture and sensor estimates was about
0.35 radians between ﬁve and six seconds. However, the
robot is outside the calibration range during this time period
and the calibration indicates an orientation of 0
  . Though
the vehicle tracks the general trend of the reference, and
recovers from large errors, its performance is low, taking
nearly a second to perform course changes. These results
indicate that while the sensor can sufﬁciently estimate the
true heading angle, further work may be necessary to ﬁnd
5520
drivesignalsthatmaximizeyawtorqueortoexplorealternate
designs [24]. Effects that lead to large errors between four
and ﬁve seconds could be the result of external air currents,
or due to the effect of downward ﬂow produced by the
wings, known as “downwash,” causing instability. We also
saw that the tether had a large effect on the orientation of the
robot, changing its position slightly could greatly effect the
orientation of the robot. Nevertheless, these results represent
the ﬁrst demonstration of heading control on a RoboBee.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The magnetometer demonstrated low latency orientation
information for an active feedback loop for absolute angle
control around both the pitch and yaw axes. These results
thus represent a step away from controlled ﬂight using
external power and Vicon toward onboard power and control
systems. Onboard sensing is a critical step in achieving
a fully autonomous robot. The sensor’s low mass, small
footprint, moderate power consumption, and high bandwidth
make it a viable candidate for integration on future genera-
tions of the RoboBee.
For this work, the circuitry required to amplify this signal
was not onboard the RoboBee and was not included in the
mass and power budget. Increasing the number of axes can
increase the amount of information about the orientation of
therobot.Thecircuitryrequiredwouldalsoincreaseforaddi-
tional axes, as each axis requires a two-wire connection and
two ampliﬁcation stages. However, this could be achieved
using one high gain ampliﬁer and an analog multiplexer on
an application-speciﬁc IC.
It has been shown that rotation rate is sufﬁcient infor-
mation to achieve upright stability on the RoboBee [25]
[26]. Taking the derivative of the magnetometer signal may
provide low-latency feedback because changes in magnetic
ﬁeld due to disturbances or translational motion will likely
be slower than the rotation rate of the RoboBee. Rotational
information from the magnetometer may prove to be less
susceptible to noise from the vibration induced by ﬂapping
wings than a similarly sized gyroscope. The ocelli have
proven capable of providing rotation rates for upright stabil-
ity[26],andgyroscopesoramagnetometermaycomplement
this signal. We will also explore the use of a magnetometer
to determine heading angle in free ﬂight, complementing the
absolute position information from the optic ﬂow sensors.
In this scenario, the ﬁnal sensor for feedback control on a
fully autonomous RoboBee will include a number of low-
level control sensors such as the ocelli and gyroscope for
proprioception, as well as a magnetometer and optic ﬂow
sensor to determine absolute position and orientation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank Kevin Ma and Benjamin
Finio for designing and fabricating the two generations of
RoboBees used in this work. We would also like to acknowl-
edge Kevin Galloway for fabricating the apparatus to tension
and hold the wire used for the yaw control experiments, and
Pakpong Chirarattananon for his assistance with estimating
the error bounds on a hovering RoboBee. This work was par-
tially supported by the National Science Foundation (award
numbers CCF-0926148 and CMMI-0746638) and the Wyss
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering. This material
is based upon work supported by the National Science
Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship under Grant No.
(DGE1144152). Any opinions, ﬁndings, and conclusions or
recommendations expressed in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] Ma, Kevin Y., Pakpong Chirarattananon, Sawyer B. Fuller, and Robert
J. Wood. “Controlled Flight of a Biologically Inspired, Insect-Scale
Robot.” Science 340, no. 6132 (2013): 603-607.
[2] Chirarattananon, Pakpong, Kevin Y. Ma, Robert J. Wood. “Adaptive
controlfortakeoff,hovering,andlandingofaroboticﬂy.”Toappearin
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on. IEEE, 2013.
[3] Wu, Wei-Chung, Luca Schenato, Robert J. Wood, and Ronald S.
Fearing. “Biomimetic sensor suite for ﬂight control of a microme-
chanical ﬂying insect: design and experimental results.” In Robotics
and Automation, 2003. Proceedings. ICRA, 2003. IEEE International
Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 1146-1151. IEEE, 2003.
[4] Wu, Wei Chung, Robert J. Wood, and Ronald S. Fearing. “Halteres
for the micromechanical ﬂying insect.” In Robotics and Automation,
2002. Proceedings. ICRA, 2002. IEEE International Conference on,
vol. 1, pp. 60-65. IEEE, 2002.
[5] Duhamel, P-EJ, Nestor Osvaldo Perez-Arancibia, Geoffrey L. Bar-
rows, and Robert J. Wood. “Altitude feedback control of a ﬂapping-
wing microrobot using an on-board biologically inspired optical ﬂow
sensor.” In Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International
Conference on, pp. 4228-4235. IEEE, 2012.
[6] Fuller, Sawyer B, Alexander Sands, Andreas Haggerty, Michael
Karpelson,andRobertJ.Wood.“Estimatingattitudeandwindvelocity
using biomimetic sensors on a microrobotic bee.” In Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE,
2013.
[7] Wajnberg, Eliane, Daniel Acosta-Avalos, Odivaldo Cambraia Alves,
Jandira Ferreira de Oliveira, Robert B. Srygley, and Darci MS Es-
quivel. “Magnetoreception in eusocial insects: an update.” Journal of
the Royal Society Interface 7, no. Suppl 2 (2010): S207-S225.
[8] Wehner, Rudiger. “Neurobiology of polarization vision.” Trends in
neurosciences 12, no. 9 (1989): 353-359.
[9] Thomson, William. “On the Electro-Dynamic Qualities of Metals:–
Effects of Magnetization on the Electric Conductivity of Nickel and
of Iron.” Proceedings of the Royal Society of London 8 (1856): 546-
550.
[10] Baibich, Mario Norberto, J. M. Broto, Albert Fert, F. Nguyen Van
Dau, F. Petroff, P. Etienne, G. Creuzet, A. Friederich, and J. Chazelas.
“Giantmagnetoresistanceof(001)Fe/(001)Crmagneticsuperlattices.”
Physical Review Letters 61, no. 21 (1988): 2472.
[11] Binasch, Grunberg, Peter Grunberg, F. Saurenbach, and W. Zinn.
“Enhanced magnetoresistance in layered magnetic structures with
antiferromagnetic interlayer exchange.” Physical review B 39 (1989):
4828-4830.
[12] Daughton, J. M. “GMR applications.” Journal of Magnetism and
Magnetic Materials 192, no. 2 (1999): 334-342.
[13] McGuire, T., and R. Potter. “Anisotropic magnetoresistance in fer-
romagnetic 3d alloys.” Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on 11, no. 4
(1975): 1018-1038.
[14] Tsang, Ching, Robert E. Fontana, Tsann Lin, David E. Heim, Virgil
S. Speriosu, Bruce A. Gurney, and Mason L. Williams. “Design,
fabrication and testing of spin-valve read heads for high density
recording.” Magnetics, IEEE Transactions on 30, no. 6 (1994): 3801-
3806.
[15] Giebeler, C., D. J. Adelerhof, A. E. T. Kuiper, J. B. A. Van Zon,
D. Oelgeschl?ger, and G. Schulz. “Robust GMR sensors for angle
detection and rotation speed sensing.” Sensors and Actuators A:
Physical 91, no. 1 (2001): 16-20.
5521
[16] Reig, Candid, Mara-Dolores Cubells-Beltrn, and Diego Ramrez Muoz.
“Magnetic ﬁeld sensors based on giant magnetoresistance (GMR)
technology: applications in electrical current sensing.” Sensors 9, no.
10 (2009): 7919-7942.
[17] Karpelson, Michael, Gu-Yeon Wei, and Robert J. Wood. “Driving high
voltage piezoelectric actuators in microrobotic applications.” Sensors
and Actuators A: Physical 176 (2012): 78-89.
[18] Caruso, Michael J., Tamara Bratland, Carl H. Smith, and Robert
Schneider. “A new perspective on magnetic ﬁeld sensing.” Sensors-
Peterborough- 15 (1998): 34-47.
[19] Honeywell, “Three Axis Magnetic Sensor HMC1043, Revision G.
Datasheet, August 2012.
[20] Karpelson, Michael, John Peter Whitney, Gu-Yeon Wei, and Robert
J. Wood. “Energetics of ﬂapping-wing robotic insects: Towards au-
tonomous hovering ﬂight.” In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 1630-1637. IEEE,
2010.
[21] Finio, Benjamin M., and Robert J. Wood. “Open-loop roll, pitch and
yawtorquesforaroboticbee.”IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),
2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on. IEEE, 2012.
[22] Ma, Kevin Y., Samuel M. Felton, and Robert J. Wood. “Design,
fabrication, and modeling of the split actuator microrobotic bee.” In
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, pp. 1133-1140. IEEE, 2012.
[23] K & J Magnetics - Strong Neodymium Magnets, Rare Earth
Magnets. “K & J Magnetics – Products B633.” Web. 1 Sept.
2013.hhttp://www.kjmagnetics.com/proddetail.asp?prod=B633i.
[24] Teoh, Z. E., and Robert J. Wood. “A Flapping-Wing Microrobot
with a Differential Angle-of-Attack Mechanism.” In Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2013 IEEE International Conference on, IEEE,
2013.
[25] Teoh, Zhi Ern, Sawyer B. Fuller, Pakpong Chirarattananon, N. O.
Perez-Arancibia, Jack D. Greenberg, and Robert J. Wood. “A hovering
ﬂapping-wing microrobot with altitude control and passive upright
stability.” In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on, pp. 3209-3216. IEEE, 2012.
[26] Fuller, Sawyer B., Michael Karpelson, Andrea Censi, Kevin Ma, and
Robert J. Wood. “First Autonomous Flight of a Robotic Fly using
Onboard Vision Sensors.” In preparation, 2013.
5522
