Needle Steering in Biological Tissue using
Ultrasound-based Online Curvature Estimation
Pedro Moreira
1
, Sachin Patil
2
, Ron Alterovitz
3
, and Sarthak Misra
1
Abstract— Percutaneous needle insertions are commonly per-
formed for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. Accurate
placement of the needle tip is important to the success of many
needle procedures. The current needle steering systems depend
on needle-tissue-speciﬁc data, such as maximum curvature, that
is unavailable prior to an interventional procedure. In this
paper, we present a novel three-dimensional adaptive steering
method for ﬂexible bevel-tipped needles that is capable of
performing accurate tip placement without previous knowl-
edge about needle curvature. The method steers the needle
by integrating duty-cycled needle steering, online curvature
estimation, ultrasound-based needle tracking, and sampling-
based motion planning. The needle curvature estimation is
performed online and used to adapt the path and duty cycling.
We evaluated the method using experiments in a homogenous
gelatin phantom, a two-layer gelatin phantom, and a biological
tissue phantom composed of a gelatin layer and in vitro chicken
tissue. In all experiments, virtual obstacles and targets move
in order to represent the disturbances that might occur due
to tissue deformation and physiological processes. The average
targeting error using our new adaptive method is 40% lower
than using the conventional non-adaptive duty-cycled needle
steering method.
I. INTRODUCTION
Needle insertion in soft tissues is a common step in many
minimally invasive medical procedures. Clinical needle-
based interventions are used in therapeutic and diagnos-
tic procedures, including biopsy, brachytherapy, and neu-
rosurgery [1]. Needle placement accuracy is crucial for
the success of many procedures, and misplacement of the
needle tip may cause misdiagnosis or unsuccessful treatment.
During needle insertion, the interaction of the needle with
tissue as well as physiological processes such as respiration
can cause the clinical target to move. Target motion, tissue
inhomogeneities, and unexpected needle/tissue interaction
forces can cause disturbances that contribute to needle place-
ment errors.
1
Pedro Moreira and Sarthak Misra are afﬁliated with MIRA
- Institute for Biomedical Technology and Technical Medicine
(Robotics and Mechatronics), University of Twente, The Netherlands.
{p.lopesdafrotamoreira,s.misra}@utwente.nl
2
Sachin Patil is with the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Sciences, University of California at Berkeley, USA.
sachinpatil@berkeley.edu
3
Ron Alterovitz is with the Department of Computer Science, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, USA. ron@cs.unc.edu
This research was supported by funds from the Dutch Ministry of
Economic Affairs and the Province of Overijssel, within the Pieken in de
Delta (PIDON) Initiative, Project MIRIAM (Minimally Invasive Robotics
In An MRI environment). This research was also supported by the United
States National Science Foundation (NSF) under award IIS-1149965 and
by the United States National Institutes of Health (NIH) under award
R21EB017952.
Target
Ultrasound image
Needle
Insertion
path
1
2
3
x
y
z
Obstacle
Fig. 1. A robotic device inserts and axially rotates a bevel-tipped ﬂexible
needle into a phantom. An ultrasound-based needle tracker estimates the
needle tip pose and a motion planning algorithm computes a feasible needle
path to the target. 1 Needle insertion device. 2 Ultrasound transducer.
3 Biological tissue phantom composed of gelatin and biological tissue.
Steerable needles have been introduced to enable clinicians
to reduce needle placement errors and maneuver around
anatomical obstacles by steering the needle during insertion
[2]. Bevel-tipped ﬂexible needles, the class of steerable
needles we focus on in this paper, naturally bend when
they are inserted through soft tissue. A kinematic model
for ﬂexible bevel-tipped needles based on the nonholonomic
unicycle model was developed by Webster et al. [3]. This
kinematic model relates needle insertion velocities and tip
position assuming that the needle bends in a circular path
with constant curvature. In order to achieve paths with
different curvatures, Engh et al. [4] introduced the technique
of duty cycled spinning of the needle.
Current models of needle steering require needle-tissue-
speciﬁc data, such as the needle’s maximum curvature, that
is typically unavailable or uncertain prior to an interventional
procedure. In current systems for ﬂexible needle steering, the
maximum curvature is typically estimated by performing a
series of pre-operative insertions. It is clear that performing
extra needle insertions to estimate the maximum curvature
contradicts the idea of minimally invasive surgery. Moreover,
biological tissues are rarely homogeneous and the needle’s
maximum curvature might vary during the insertion. There-
fore, online estimation of the needle’s maximum curvature
is important to enable accurate needle tip placement using
steerable needles.
Needle steering systems combining the nonholonomic
model proposed by Webster et al. [3] and the duty cycling
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4368
Insertion
Needle
Transducer
Obstacle
Target
Best path
Computed paths
Tip
pose
estimation
Transducer positioning device
Needle tip
US image
x
y
z
Fig. 2. Needle tracking and path planning: The ultrasound (US) transducer is robotically positioned on the same plane as the needle tip. The tip pose
is estimated using the information from the US image, the needle insertion device, and the transducer positioning device. The needle pose is used by the
motion planner at each re-planning step to generate many feasible paths to the target. The planner selects the best path such that the needle path length is
minimized while avoiding obstacles.
technique were presented by Minhas et al. [5] and Wood
et al. [6]. Wood et al. [6] also implemented a nonlinear
control algorithm for path tracking using charge-coupled
device (CCD) cameras to provide the needle tip position
and orientation. The needle path is computed based on
pre-operative information, such as the insertion point and
locations of the obstacles and the target. However, the
aforementioned work does not consider obstacle and target
motions that may occur during a needle insertion procedure.
Xu et al. [7] and Patil and Alterovitz [8] presented path plan-
ning algorithms for steerable needles based on the Rapidly-
Exploring Random Tree (RRT) algorithm in order to enable
avoidance of obstacles. The planners were validated through
simulation studies. Bernardes et al. [9] presented experiments
with two-dimensional (2D) needle insertions using RRT-
based path planning and duty-cycled rotations. The needle
tip position was estimated using a CCD camera. The use
of CCD cameras as an imaging modality creates a drawback
for clinical implementations. Additionally, the state of the art
duty-cycled steering algorithms require previous knowledge
of the maximum needle curvature during the insertion. The
needle curvature depends on many factors, such as tissue
stiffness, needle diameter, and bevel-tip angle. In addition,
the current duty-cycled needle steering methods assume that
the environments are homogeneous and maximum needle
curvatures are constant. However, biological tissues are in-
homogeneous [10].
This work proposes a novel three-dimensional (3D) adap-
tive duty-cycled needle steering approach able to cope with
inhomogeneous tissues and unknown tissue properties. The
approach estimates online the needle’s curvature based on the
needle tip’s motion and adaptively updates the path and duty
cycling. The system integrates a 3D ultrasound-based needle
tracker [11] and RRT-based path planning [8]. Experiments
steering a ﬂexible needle toward a moving target on two-
layer gelatin phantoms and biological tissue phantoms are
presented in order to validate the proposed method (Fig. 1).
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the
adaptive steering method is described. Section III presents
the experimental setup and results, followed by Section IV ,
which concludes and provides directions for future work.
II. METHODS
First, we present the needle tracking and path planning
methods. Subsequently, we describe the needle steering
method based on duty-cycled spinning of the needle. Finally,
we present the online curvature estimation method.
A. Ultrasound-based needle tracking and path planning
The needle tip pose is estimated using a 2D ultrasound
transducer. The transducer is placed perpendicular to the
needle tip to measure its position (Fig. 2). During the
needle insertion, the transducer is robotically repositioned
to track the needle tip. The transducer is positioned by
a robotic device that uses the insertion velocity corrected
by tip velocities to determine out-of-plane motion [12]. An
image processing algorithm is used to estimate the needle tip
position from the ultrasound image by applying basic image
processing techniques such as median ﬁltering, thresholding,
erosion, and dilation [11]. The needle tracking frequency is
25 Hz and the maximum mean errors in needle tip positions
are 0.64 mm, 0.25 mm, and 0.27 mm along the x-, y-, and
z-axes, respectively.
The path planner computes a feasible path to a speciﬁed
target from the needle tip pose provided by the ultrasound-
based tracker. We use the steerable needle motion planning
algorithm introduced by Patil and Alterovitz [8]. We adapted
the motion planner to use the needle tip pose estimated by the
ultrasound-based tracker. The objective of the motion planner
is to compute a feasible needle path from the current state
to the target while avoiding obstacles. The motion planner is
executed repeatedly at a frequency of 1 Hz until the target
is reached. At each re-planning step, the motion planner
generates many plans (typically hundreds) and selects the
plan that best fulﬁlls user-speciﬁed criteria, which in our
4369
P
3D
US needle tracking
Curvature estimation
Path planning
Needle insertion device
^ 
d
Kalman
^ 
d
^ 
max
Target
T
rot
and T
ins
ﬁlter
DC steering
algorithm
Fig. 3. The overall system diagram. The needle insertion device rotates and inserts the needle with rotation periods (T rot ) and insertion periods (T
ins
)
deﬁned by the duty-cycled (DC) steering algorithm. The desired needle path is computed by the Rapidly-Exploring Random Tree (RRT) motion planning
algorithm. The needle curvature (^ 
d
) and the maximum curvature (^  max ) are deﬁned by the estimation algorithm. P
3D
is the needle tip position estimated
by the ultrasound (US) needle tracker.
implementation is minimizing the length of the needle path
while avoiding obstacles.
The planned motion is composed of arcs with speciﬁed
curvatures (
d
) that can vary from the maximum curvature to
a straight path. The curvature speciﬁed by the motion planner
is then passed to the duty-cycled needle steering controller.
B. Duty-cycled needle steering control
The duty cycling technique is based on the idea of
inserting and rotating the needle simultaneously to provide
different needle curvatures during the insertion. The method
works by alternating insertion periods with and without high-
speed needle rotation. The needle moves straight when it
is inserted and rotated at the same time. If no rotation is
applied during the insertion the needle follows a path with
maximum curvature ( =
max
). The proportion of the time
spent rotating (T
rot
) relative to the time spent inserting (T
ins
)
is called the duty cycle factor (), and it is given by [5]
 =
T
rot
T
rot
+T
ins
: (1)
In some phantoms this factor is related to the desired needle
curvature (
d
) and the maximum curvature (
max
) by

d
=
max
(1 ): (2)
In the proposed steering algorithm, the maximum curvature
(
max
) is estimated and updated online.
C. Curvature estimation and online adaptation
In this subsection we present the method to adapt the
relationship between desired curvature (
d
) and duty cycle
factor (). An online curvature estimation is performed,
followed by a maximum curvature adaptation. The overall
control scheme is depicted in Fig. 3.
The curvature estimation is performed by deﬁning the
needle path as a series of arcs with constant curvatures. Each
arc is considered as a sub-trajectory. This sub-trajectory is
deﬁned by one duty-cycling period, which is 1 second and
has 30 tip pose measurements. A least squares algorithm is
used to estimate the radius of curvature at each sub-trajectory.
The 3D curvature estimation problem is transformed into a
series of 2D problems (Fig. 4). The principal component
analysis (PCA) is used to ﬁnd the plane where the sub-
trajectory path is performed.
A fast PCA algorithm is implemented by using singular
value decomposition (SVD), as presented in Algorithm 1.
The planar motion of the needle tip is given by the projected
data-set (P
2D
). A least squares ﬁtting of a circle is performed
in order to estimate the curvature (^ 
d
) for each sub-trajectory.
Needle tip
^ r
d
^ r
2
d
= ( x a)
2
+ ( y b)
2
Entry point
Sub-trajectories
y
x
z
 x
 y
(0,0,0)
Fig. 4. The needle path is divided into sub-trajectories. In each sub-
trajectory the needle follows a circular path, and the radius of curvature
(^ r
d
) is estimated by a circle ﬁtting algorithm. The center of the circle has
coordinates (a;b).
Algorithm 1 PCA using SVD
for i = 0 :N do
P
3D
(i; 1) tip_position_x(i)
P
3D
(i; 2) tip_position_y(i)
P
3D
(i; 3) tip_position_z(i)
end for
P
3D
 P
3D
 mean(P
3D
) {subtract the mean value}
[U, , V] svd(P
3D
) {SVD decomposition}
P
2D
 U
T
P
3D
{project the 3D data}
^ r
d
 circleﬁtting(P
2D
) {Least squares circle ﬁtting}
^ 
d
 1=^ r
d
The estimated needle curvature (^ 
d
) and the applied duty
cycle factor () are used to calculate the maximum needle
curvature (
max
). Accurately ﬁtting a circle to the needle path
is difﬁcult when the needle path approaches a straight line. In
addition, errors in sensing the tip position induce noise in the
radius of curvature estimation. To address these difﬁculties,
we use a Kalman Filter (KF) [13] to estimate the maximum
4370
Entry point
(0,0,0)
Entry point
(0,0,0)
Entry point
(0,0,0)
Target
Target
Target
Biological
tissue
Obstacle
Obstacle
Obstacle
(a) (b) (c)
Layer 1
Layer 2
z
y
x
Fig. 5. Experimental phantoms and scenarios. (a) Scenario 1, experiments performed in a homogenous phantom. (b) Scenario 2, experiments performed
in a two-layer phantom. (c) Scenario 3, experiments performed in a biological tissue phantom. In all experiments the initial target location is set tox=90
mm, y = 15 mm, and z = 5 mm.
curvature (
max
). We deﬁne a discrete system based on (2)
with estimated curvature (^ 
d
) as an output. The matrices for
state space representation are
y = ^ 
d
, x =

^ 
d

max

T
, C =

1 0

and
A =

0 (1 )
0 1

:
The state estimation is given by
^ x(k + 1) = A^ x(k) + K(k)e(k) (3)
where ^ x is the estimated state vector, K(k) is the Kalman
gain, and e = ^ 
d
  C^ x(k). For the experiments presented
in this work the KF is experimentally tuned with system
covariance 7 10
 6
and measurement covariance 4 10
 4
.
The KF estimates the maximum curvature (
max
), which is
used to adapt the duty-cycled needle steering algorithm.
III. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we describe the experiments performed to
evaluate the adaptive needle steering method. The experi-
mental results are also presented in this section.
A. Experimental scenarios
Experiments are conducted to validate the adaptive needle
steering method. The needle is steered to a target in a non-
static environment while avoiding obstacles. The experiments
are performed with moving obstacles and targets to mimic
the displacements caused by tissue deformation and physio-
logical processes. No previous insertions were performed to
estimate the maximum needle curvature. The initial value
for the maximum radius of curvature is set to 270 mm
(
max
= 0:0037 mm
 1
) for all experiments. This value was
reported by Abayazid et al. [14] as the maximum radius
of curvature in gelatin phantoms that are similar to the ones
used in this work. Our proposed adaptive method is evaluated
under three different experimental scenarios (Fig. 5):
1) Homogenous phantom: The needle is steered towards
a moving target in a homogeneous phantom while
avoiding a moving obstacle. In this experimental sce-
nario we evaluate targeting accuracy when the needle’s
maximum curvature is unknown.
2) Two-layer phantom: The needle is steered towards a
moving target in a two-layer phantom while avoiding a
moving obstacle. The ﬁrst layer is made softer than the
second layer. The different elastic properties of each
layer change the maximum radius of curvature. The
goal of this scenario is to evaluate our method under
abrupt changes in elastic properties.
3) Biological tissue phantom: The needle is steered to-
wards a moving target in a two-layer phantom com-
posed of gelatin and biological tissue. The goal of
this experimental scenario is to evaluate the targeting
accuracy in biological tissues.
B. Experimental setup
The experimental setup used to steer the needles into
phantoms is shown in Fig. 1. The needle insertion device
has two degrees of freedom: translation along and rotation
about the insertion axis [15]. During the needle insertion,
ultrasound-based tracking (Transducer 18L6HD, Siemens
ACUSON S2000 ultrasound system, Siemens AG, Erlangen,
Germany) is used to estimate the needle tip pose. The needle
used in the experiments is made of Nitinol (E = 75 GPa).
It is a solid wire with diameter of 1 mm and has a bevel tip
angle of 30

.
The needle is inserted in phantoms prepared with a mixture
of water, gelatin (Dr.Oetker, Ede, The Netherlands), and
silica gel 63 (E. Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). The Young’s
modulus of each phantom is estimated using an ultrasound-
based Acoustic Radiation Force Impulse (ARFI) imaging
technique. The shear wave propagation speed is measured
using a commercially-available implementation of the ARFI
imaging technique, known as Virtual Touch
TM
Quantiﬁca-
tion, available on the Siemens ACUSON S2000 ultrasound
system. The Young’s modulus (E) is calculated as
E = 2v
2
s
(1 +); (4)
where is the Poisson’s ratio, is the density, andv
s
is the
shear wave propagation speed [16].
The phantoms are prepared with elastic properties similar
to human tissues to provide a more realistic clinical scenario.
The homogeneous phantom is prepared with 84% water,
15% gelatin, and 1% silica. The Young’s modulus of this
4371
(a) (b) (c)
vs =3:19
=1150
E =35 kPa
vs =2:76
=1100
E =25 kPa
Layer 1
vs =5:10
=1200
E =90 kPa
Layer 2
vs =3:20
=1150
E =35 kPa
Gelatin
vs =4:12
=1245
E =62 kPa
Biological tissue
Fig. 6. Ultrasound-based acoustic radiation force impulse imaging tech-
nique used in the elasticity estimation for all three phantoms. The Poisson’s
ratio () is assumed to be0:495. (a) Homogeneous phantom; (b) Two-layer
phantom, and (c) Biological tissue phantom.
phantom is calculated to be 35 kPa, which is similar to
human breast tissue [17]. The ﬁrst layer of the two-layer
phantom is prepared with 90% water, 9% gelatin, and 1%
silica, which results in E 25 kPa. The second layer has
80% water, 19% gelatin, 1% silica, and E 90 kPa. The
two-layer phantom has elasticity similar to a normal fat tissue
(E 22 kPa) and a cancerous prostate (E 96 kPa) [18].
The biological tissue phantom is composed of a layer of
gelatin (with the same concentration as the homogeneous
phantom) and a layer of in vitro chicken breast tissue (Fig.
5c). The ultrasound ARFI images for all three phantoms are
presented in Fig. 6. The phantoms are maintained at 7

C
for at least 5 hours before the experiments are performed.
C. Results
The needle is inserted with a velocity of 3 mm/s. The
initial virtual target location for all experiments is x = 90
mm, y = 15 mm, and z = 5 mm. After 20 s of needle
insertion, the target starts to move with a constant velocity
of 0.4 mm/s along the x-axis until the needle reaches the
target. The target depth of 90 mm is within the range of
typical biopsy depths of prostate lesions and tumors which
are approximately between 50 to 90 mm [19]. The insertion
stops when the needle tip and target positions in the x-axis
are equal. The obstacle is deﬁned to simulate a bone of 20
mm diameter, and located at x = 55 mm, y = 5 mm, and
z = 0 mm. The obstacle moves along the y-axis during the
ﬁrst 10 s with a constant velocity of 0.3 mm/s. The obstacle
movement simulates displacements on sensitive tissues that
might happens due to physiological processes.
Six experiments are performed for each scenario, three
using our adaptive method and three using the conventional
duty-cycled steering algorithm, i.e., without adaptation. The
results are summarized in Table I. One experimental result
for each scenario is given in Fig. 7. Further, the evolution of
the estimated maximum needle curvature (
max
) is presented
in Fig. 8. The maximum curvature varies as the needle
-16
obstacle
y (mm)
-12 -8 -4 0
100
80
60
40
20
0
-6
0
-2
-4
10
30
50
70
90
x (mm)
z (mm)
Target
Fig. 7. Representative experimental results steering a bevel-tipped ﬂexible
needle towards a moving target while avoiding a moving obstacle. Red line
is the result in a homogeneous phantom (Scenario 1), black line is the result
in a two-layer phantom (Scenario 2) and blue line is the result in a biological
tissue phantom (Scenario 3). Please refer to the accompanying video that
demonstrates the experimental results.
crosses the interface between layers. In Scenario 2, the
variation of the estimated maximum curvature is abrupt since
the needle enters a stiffer environment. In Scenario 3, this
variation is smooth since the needle enters an inhomogeneous
biological tissue. Although the initial value of maximum
curvature is deﬁned based on previous reported values in
Abayazid et al. [14], one can observe that after the inser-
tion starts the estimated maximum curvature increases. This
happens because even with the same gelatin concentration,
other aspects inﬂuence the maximum curvature, such as the
temperature that the phantoms were stored and the age of
the gelatin. The experimental results in Scenario 1 show
that using our adaptive method the average targeting error
is 46% lower than using the non-adaptive method. Our
adaptive method was able to reduce the targeting error by
53% in the two-layer phantom experiments. The experiments
in biological tissue phantom show that our method achieved
a targeting error 39% lower than using the non-adaptive
method.
The results show that the targeting accuracy of duty-cycled
needle steering was improved in all three scenarios. The
average errors in Scenario 2 show that our adaptive method is
able to cope with changes in the phantom elastic properties.
In some experiments of Scenario 3 when the needle was
inside the biological tissue, the tracking algorithm could not
distinguish the needle tip from internal structures of the
tissue, which induce errors in the tip position estimation.
Improvements in the needle tracking system will reduce the
ﬁnal targeting error.
TABLE I
RMS TARGETING ERRORS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS IN ALL
EXPERIMENTAL SCENARIOS
Scenario
Targeting error (mm)
Without adaptive method With adaptive method
1 1:880:82 1:020:73
2 2:350:80 0:980:23
3 3:151:02 2:460:81
4372
0
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.030
0.035
Scenario 1
Scenario 2
Scenario 3
5 10 15 20 25 30
Time (s)
max (1/mm)
layer interface
layer interface (Scenario 3)
(Scenario 2)
Fig. 8. Estimated maximum curvature during the needle steering experi-
ments. The red line is the curvature estimation in the homogeneous gelatin
phantom (Scenario 1), the black line is the curvature estimation in the
two-layer gelatin phantom (Scenario 2), and the blue line is the curvature
estimation in the biological tissue phantom composed of gelatin and in vitro
chicken breast tissue (Scenario 3).
IV. CONCLUSION
We presented an adaptive method to steer a bevel-tipped
ﬂexible needle to a moving target in inhomogeneous phan-
toms while avoiding a moving obstacle. The system in-
tegrates ultrasound-based needle tracking, RRT-based path
planning, and an online curvature estimation algorithm. The
results show that our method was able to perform needle
tip placement in three different scenarios: a homogeneous
gelatin phantom, a gelatin phantom with two different elastic
properties, and a biological tissue phantom composed of a
gelatin layer and an in vitro chicken tissue, where average
targeting errors for the three experimental scenarios were
1:02 mm, 0:98 mm, and 2:46 mm, respectively. The results
in all three scenarios demonstrate that our method was
able to reduce the targeting error by approximately 40%
when compared to the non-adaptive duty-cycled method.
The targeting errors are in the same range as the smallest
target that can be detected using ultrasound images, which
is typically 2 mm [14]. The results indicate that the online
adaptation can be used to perform needle steering without
previous knowledge of needle curvature. The results also
demonstrate the system’s ability to cope with multi-layer
gelatin phantoms and biological tissues.
Future work will focus on improving the ultrasound-
based needle tracking to increase its robustness by including
a needle deﬂection model in the tip position estimation
algorithm. More experiments are planned to investigate the
inﬂuence of insertion velocity and obstacle motion on the
targeting accuracy. We are currently adapting our transducer
positioning device to move on curved surfaces which will
allow us to perform in vivo studies. We will also investigate
the relationship between the Young’s modulus of the tissue
and the maximum radius of curvature. Our current study
demonstrates that it is possible to improve the accuracy of
needle tip placement by using an online adaptive steering
method.
REFERENCES
[1] T. K. Podder, D. P. Clark, J. Sherman, D. Fuller, E. M. Messing, D. J.
Rubens, J. G. Strang, Y . D. Zhang, W. O’Dell, W. S. Ng, and Y . Yu,
“Effects of tip geometry of surgical needles: An assessment of force
and deﬂection,” in European Medical and Biological Engineering
Conference (EMBEC), Prague, Czech Republic, November 2005.
[2] N. Abolhassani, R. Patel, and M. Moallem, “Needle insertion into soft
tissue: A survey,” Medical Engineering & Physics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp.
413 – 431, 2007.
[3] R. J. Webster III, J. S. Kim, N. J. Cowan, G. S. Chirikjian, and
A. M. Okamura, “Nonholonomic modeling of needle steering,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, pp. 509 – 525, 2006.
[4] J. Engh, G. Podnar, S. Khoo, and C. Riviere, “Flexible needle steering
system for percutaneous access to deep zones of the brain,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Annual Northeast Bioengineering Conference,
April 2006, pp. 103 – 104.
[5] D. S. Minhas, J. A. Engh, M. M. Fenske, and C. N. Riviere, “Modeling
of needle steering via duty-cycled spinning,” in Proceedings of the
Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine
and Biology Society (EMBC), Buenos Aires, Argentina, August 2007,
pp. 5432 – 5435.
[6] N. A. Wood, K. Shahrour, M. C. Ost, and C. N. Riviere, “Needle
steering system using duty-cycled rotation for percutaneous kidney
access,” in Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Buenos
Aires, Argentina, September 2010, pp. 5432 – 5435.
[7] J. Xu, V . Duindam, R. Alterovitz, and K. Goldberg, “Motion planning
for steerable needles in 3D environments with obstacles using rapidly-
exploring random trees and backchaining,” in Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE), Arlington, USA, August 2008, pp. 41 – 46.
[8] S. Patil and R. Alterovitz, “Interactive motion planning for steer-
able needles in 3D environments with obstacles,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE RAS and EMBS International Conference on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), Tokyo, Japan, September
2010, pp. 893 – 899.
[9] M. Bernardes, B. Adorno, P. Poignet, and G. Borges, “Robot-assisted
automatic insertion of steerable needles with closed-loop imaging
feedback and intraoperative trajectory replanning,” Mechatronics,
vol. 23, no. 6, pp. 630 – 645, 2013.
[10] S. Misra, K. T. Ramesh, and A. M. Okamura, “Needle insertion into
soft tissue: A survey,” Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environ-
ments, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 463 – 491, 2008.
[11] G. J. Vrooijink, M. Abayazid, and S. Misra, “Real-time three-
dimensional ﬂexible needle tracking using two-dimensional ultra-
sound,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), Karlsruhe, Germany, May 2013,
pp. 1680 – 1685.
[12] G. J. Vrooijink, M. Abayazid, S. Patil, R. Alterovitz, and S. Misra,
“Needle path planning and steering in a three-dimensional non-static
environment using two-dimensional ultrasound images,” International
Journal of Robotics Research (In Proof), 2014.
[13] G. C. Goodwin and K. S. Sin, Adaptive Filtering Prediction and
Control, 1st ed. New York: Dover, 2009.
[14] M. Abayazid, R. J. Roesthuis, R. Reilink, and S. Misra, “Integrating
deﬂection models and image feedback for real-time ﬂexible needle
steering,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 542 –
553, 2013.
[15] R. J. Roesthuis, Y . R. J. van Veen, A. Jahya, and S. Misra, “Mechanics
of needle-tissue interaction,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), San Francisco, USA, September 2011,
pp. 2557 – 2563.
[16] W. Assaad and S. Misra, “Combining ultrasound-based elasticity
estimation and FE models to predict 3D target displacement,” Medical
Engineering & Physics, vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 549 – 554, 2013.
[17] A. Gefen and B. Dilmoney, “Mechanics of the normal woman’s
breast,” Technology and Health Care, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 259 – 271,
2007.
[18] T. A. Krouskop, T. M. Wheeler, F. K. B. S. Garra, and T. Hall, “Elastic
moduli of breast and prostate tissues under compression,” Ultrasonic
Imaging, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 260 – 274, 1998.
[19] D. Stoianovici, D. Song, D. Petrisor, D. Ursu, D. Mazilu, M. Mutener,
M. Schar, and A. Patriciu, “MRI stealth robot for prostate interven-
tions,” Minimally Invasive Therapy & Allied Technologies, vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 241 – 248, 2007.
4373
