Design of a robot for in-pipe inspection using omnidirectional wheels
and active stabilization
Edwin Dertien
1
, Mohammad Mozaffari Foumashi
1
, Kees Pulles
2
and Stefano Stramigioli
1
Abstract—This paper discusses the design of a vehicle for
in-pipe inspection using omnidirectional wheels and active
stabilizing control. A novelpropulsion mechanism is discussed
using omnidirectional wheels (or omni-wheels) is presented
which allows direct control of the orientation in the pipe. This
paperwillshowthe developmentandevaluation ofaprototype
model. Rapid prototyping techniques have been used in this
proof-of-principle.
I. INTRODUCTION
The PIRATE (Pipe Inspection Robot for Autonomous
Exploration) project aims at developing a robot platform
for in-pipe inspection of the low pressure (urban) gas
distribution mains. The platform has to be able to carry
out visual inspection and leak searching using auditive
noise-based sensors. Based on statistical data available on
the (Dutch) gas distribution net [12], design requirements
for size and maneuverability have been determined [9].
Fig. 1: Robot design with two clamping V-shapes using
omnidirectional wheels
A. Goal
One of the most restricting design requirements is
being capable in maneuvering in smooth PVC and PE
pipes (also occasionally in grey cast iron) in a relatively
wide diameter range of 63 mm (57 mm inside) to 125
mm while at the same time being able to take a sharp
(mitered) bend. In earlier work [2] a mechanism has
been presented satisfying these requirements. In order to
make an axial rotation in the pipe however a series of
clamping and unclamping motions is necessary, as shown
in video of this work [1]. In this paper a solution will be
presented which allows for continuous control of the axial
1
Robotics and Mechatronics group, CTIT Institute, Uni-
versity of Twente, 7500 AE Enschede, The Netherlands
e.dertien@utwente.nl
2
Kees Pulles is with Kiwa, Apeldoorn, the Netherlands
kees.pulles@kiwa.nl
orientation of the mechanism, while clamping inside the
pipe.
B. State of the art
Many very different designs exist for mechanisms mov-
ing inside pipes. In the category of wheeled inspection
vehicles (as opposed to crawling snake-like robots [14] or
pneumatic inch-worm type mechanisms [5]) a distinction
can be made between clamping mechanisms and non-
clamping. A different branch of magnetic wheels [15],
tailored for moving only in ferro-magnetic pipes is not
considered here. For inspection of large sewer pipes a
large number of wheeled vehicles exist which provide
traction with the pipe-wall simply trough their weight.
In smoother pipes a way of clamping the vehicle is
necessary for maintaining traction force. A number of
wheeled clamping structures exist, all with their own mer-
its considering minimal pass-trough, number of clamping
contact points and number of articulated joints, moving
inside pipes such as the MRINSPECT series [3] and the
advanced work on the CMU Explorer series [14] and many
others starting with the work by Hirose et al. [4]. Recently
a number of overview articles of in-pipe inspection robots
have been published such as the work by Roslin et al. [10]
or Liu et al. [6]. However, none of the existing projects
targetsboth the small diameter, largespreading factor and
capabilities of taking mitered bends at the same time.
C. Robot concept
The chosen concept: a clamping V-shape has been
discussed brieﬂy in the works by Neubauer et al. [7]. The
conceptual design of the RoboScan [13] and the PIRATE
series of in-pipe inspection robots [2][9] make use of
this concept. The PIRATE concept is shown in ﬁgure 2
and consists of two clamping V-shapes separated with a
module for axial rotation. Note that the robot can move
both in the horizontal and vertical plane (and anywhere
in between) aided by this rotation module. The preferred
driving orientation will be in the horizontal plane, so most
of the pictures and schematic drawings in fact show the
top view.
pipe wall
pipe wall
rotation module
clamping
V-shape
Fig. 2: Schematic overview of the original robot concept
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5121
D. Proposed mechanism
With most of the peristaltic or crawler-type robots no
attention is paid to the orientation (or rotation) of the
system inside the pipe - or is not actively compensated
for. The CMU snake [14] makes explicit use of the rotation
movement inside a pipe and compensates the generated
CCTV image so the operator has a level horizon view.
Other systems such as the MRINSPECT or Roboscan
design have a preferred orientation but can change their
orientation also by a series of (un)clamping and rotation
movements.
The chosen curved shape of the PIRATE robot modules
enforces a preferred orientation for taking bends and
corners, i.e., they can only be taken in one plane or
orientation, dictated by the direction of the bend. One of
the prerequisites of taking a corner is that this orientation
or rotation in the pipe can be selected or controlled. In
the original PIRATE design this is facilitated by a separate
rotation module which allows one section of the robot to
unclamp and rotate withrespect to another module which
stays clamped.
In the conceptual Roboscan design [13] this rotation is
possible by rotating the driven wheels around their z-axis.
However, in the limited space available for the PIRATE
concept, there is no room for extra actuators.
The rotation using a rotation module whilst clamping
one of the modules causes an amount of friction of the
module that is rotating in the pipe, as can be seen in de
video’s [2]. An alternative has been found in using smooth
plastic (nylon) wheels instead of the rubber wheels, but
in the second prototype with all-wheel-drive this solution
was no longer an option.
A possible solution for this problem is explored in this
paper, using omni-wheels
1
or mecanum wheels
2
. These
wheels have been used in many robot platforms mainly
aimed at a ﬂat ﬂoor. They have been deployed in other
pipe inspection robots, such as commercially exploited by
helical robotics
3
. One reference of using omni-directional
tracks in the context of pipe inspection had been found
in the works of Tadakuma et al.[11].
Fig. 3: Transwheel image - image from Kornylak.com
In the following section the analysis of the design
considerations will be given, followed by implementation
1
WikiPedia on OmniWheels
2
Sometimes also called ’Swedish wheels’. The wheels used are called
’Transwheel’ by Kornylak.com
3
Helical Robotics website: http://www.helicalrobotics.com
details, results and conclusions.
II. ANALYSIS
In this section the main considerations for adapting the
previous design will be given, focusing on the clamping
mechanism, the propulsion, sensing and modularity. The
realized robot is shown in ﬁgure 1 for reference. The
implementation of this design will be discussed in the
next section.
The clamping V-shape used in the previously described
robot needs to unclamp before a rotation in the pipe
can be made, as described in [2]. This clamping and
unclamping is realized using a series of pre-programmed
movements (basically unclamp-rotate-clamp).
A. Orientation
Due to irregularities in the pipe surface, weight distri-
bution, pulling of the tether the robot will not remain in
the chosen plain, but its orientation candeviate over time.
Periodicallyunclamping, rotatingandre-clampingissofar
the only possible solution. For semi-autonomous control,
used by an operator, this behavior is highly undesirable.
A mechanism needs to be found without a holonomic
constraint around systems principle axis, so that contin-
uous control of the mechanisms orientation is possible.
Although eventually autonomous control is intended with
the mechanism, also for user controlled operation this
mechanism would be desirable, especially since selection
of entering bends and T-Joints is depending on the orien-
tation of the system.
For forward propulsion, traction (resistive force or fric-
tion) in the driving direction has to be maximized by
the wheels. The chosen wheels have small inset wheels
consisting of rubber.
However, for the rotation maneuver, it is necessary
that the robot has as little friction with the pipe wall as
possible. In the ﬁrst prototype this has eventually been
solved by replacing most of the rubber wheels by nylon
wheels. The same problem has been solved on a different
(conceptual) level by the RoboScan design [13] where
wheels have been employed which can rotate round a
vertical axis. This concept has also been used in many
other designs described by [10]. The solution explored
and proposed here makes use of the properties of an
omniwheel to provide friction necessary for traction in the
driving direction while allowing free motion in a direction
tangential to the wheel.
B. Wheel choice
Robots with omnidirectional wheels are mainly used
on ﬂat ﬂoors. Different wheel designs exist, the main
difference lying in their roll-off shape. A typical mecanum
wheelcanhaveacontinuous motiononaﬂatﬂoorprovid-
ing traction perpendicular to the roller wheel orientation,
for example 45?. In the chosen wheel the roller wheels
are perpendicular to the driving direction. On ﬂat ﬂoors
normally a double set of these wheels is used, however
5122
space constraints only allow for one. The number of
roller wheels used inside one omniwheel inﬂuence the
’bumpiness’ of the rolling motion.
C. Clamping
The robot uses a V-shaped section consisting of two
modules to generate friction force with the wheels for
traction. The amount of friction force that can be gen-
erated using this V-shape is depending on the diameter
of the pipe. The maximum attainable clamping force (F
n
)
on the pipe wall is given by (repeated from [2]):
T
F
n
F
n
2F
n
d
1
L
d
w
D
?
wheel1
wheel2
wheel3
Fig. 4: Schematic view of a clamping V-shape. Note that
the center wheel has been drawn in driving direction in
this ﬁgure.
F
n
=
T
d
1
=
T
p
L
2
?(D?d
w
)
2
(1)
whereL isthelengthofamodule,d
w
isthewheeldiam-
eter, D the pipe diameter and T the exerted torque by the
clamping module (see ﬁgure 4). The relation is graphed
in ﬁgure 5 with L=0.075 m and d
w
=0.052 m. The wheel
diameters are considered identical for all wheels in this
case. Since the mechanism is ideally operating in the
horizontal plane (all the schematic drawings show the top
view of the system) gravity does not directly counter-act
the clamping force graphed in ﬁgure 4.
Fn[N]
D[mm]
Fig. 5: Normal force on the pipe wall per Nm clamping
torque for different pipe diameters
The reaction torque of the wheels used for propulsion
also add to clamping torque T, depending on the driving
direction. In forward direction the torque of the second
drive motor adds to the clamping torque while ﬁrst and
third motor subtract from the effect.
T =T
clamp
+T
motor2
?T
motor1
?T
motor3
(2)
In the previous prototype the clamping torque is gen-
erated through a DC motor using a worm gear. Power
of this motor is transferred to the joint trough a spring
(series elastic[8]) and worm gear which enables the joint
to keep a clamping force without powering the motor,
even compensating for small bumps in the pipe wall
without any intervention.
For simplicity sake the clamping force has been pro-
vided using a linear spring (implemented as a series of
rubber bands). To keep the robot centered in a 125mm
pipe a clamping force of at least 5N needs to be provided
(experimentally validated). The force provided by the joint
in this pipe is 13.5 N per Nm according to ﬁgure 5. A
torque of 5/13.5=0.37Nm is necessary, which can easily
provided using the chosen rubber bands.
Although the deformation of the roller wheels due to
hysteresis in the material is very small, it still causes a
considerable amount of rolling friction F
rf
, depending
on the exerted amount of clamping force. To let the
robot drive (uphill) a traction force of at least 4.41N
has to be delivered by three motors (from results of the
measurements on the previous robot prototype), resulting
in 100 mNm per motor. The force loss
F
rf
=C
r
·F
n
=
C
r
?
T
m
r
w
(3)
is depending on wheel radius r
w
and estimated friction
constant C
r
=0.01?0.015. The resulting friction torque is
about 5% of the motor torque per wheel.
The chosen motors (Faulhaber 2619 SR series with
included 112:1 gear box) can deliver up to 100mNm.
Due to space restrictions these where the only motors
available capableofdelivering the requiredtorque without
additional gear reduction.
The wheel motors have 16 ppr incremental encoders on
the motor shaft. With a reduction of 1:112 and a wheel
diameter of 52 mm this results in a resolution of 0.083
mm per pulse which is more than sufﬁcient for velocity
measurement and position control.
D. Active Stabilization
For the active stabilization a straightforward PID con-
troller will be used. Since odometry data is likely to be
inﬂuenced by slip with the pipe wall, an external sensor
fororientation isnecessary. Anaccelerometer willbeused.
An accelerometer measures gravitation but also external
accelerations (and can not distinguish between both).
Since the accelerations in z-direction or y-direction
(tangent to the pipe wall) are minimal with respect to the
main drive motion in x-direction, acceleration data of the
y axis provides the most reliable source while driving in
the horizontalplane. Notethatwhendrivinginthe vertical
5123
plane also the z axis is necessary to yield an accurate and
high-resolution signal. The angle can be calculated using
?=arcsin(a
y
)
where a
y
is the digitally acquired acceleration in y direc-
tion (tangent to the pipe wall).
III. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Mechanical design
In order to quickly evaluate the design and test the
stabilization control a mechanical prototype has been
designed using ﬂat 3 mm Delrin sheet and a limited
number of extra parts. Using ﬂat plate has the advantage
that the design can be manufactured quickly using a laser
cutter, allowing for short development cycles. The CAD
design is shown in ﬁgure 6, the ﬁnal implementation in
ﬁgure 7. In totally stretched conﬁguration the robot is 47
cm long and weighs 450 gram.
Fig. 6: CAD sketch of the proposed robot mechanism
The design uses six motorized wheels using the earlier
described Faulhaber 2619 SR series with included 112:1
gear box. The omni-wheels have been mounted to the
output shafts directly.
In order to keep the orientation of the rotation motor
perpendicular to the pipe wall, the joint in the clamping
V-shape consists of two geared branches. The gears make
sure the piece holding the rotationmotor alwaysholds the
center of the triangle. The both legs of the triangle have a
length of 75 mm, the wheels have a diameter of 52mm. In
theory a range of diameters between 80mm and 125 mm
should be possible using this setup, where it not for the
size (length) of the motors. Only when they are mounted
inside the wheels (the 52 mm wheel allows for a 26 mm
motor to be mounted within) this minimum diameter can
be ranged using this prototype.
As described in the previous section, instead of the
active clamping mechanism for this prototype a passive
system is used. The rubber bands extended 86mm inside
the pipe with the diameter of 125 mm. The force exerted
from the rubber bands when the module is inside a pipe
with the diameter of 120 mm is between 7.0 N and 7.2 N
(measured by a spring balance).
Fig. 7: Model inside a 125mm pipe
B. Electronics
Control electronics for the experiments consist of an
embedded micro controller (Atmel ATmega328) control-
ling the DC motors through a number of H-bridge driver
chips (L298) measuring current through shunt resistors
and low-pass ﬁlter. Two incremental encoders, one on
a drive motor and one of a rotation motor have been
connected for measuring position. Lastly an ADXL345
accelerometer shown in ﬁgure 8 has been connected
through an I
2
C bus for measuring orientation.
Since for the time being only one rotation is considered
(and allowed by the setup) just one axis of the accelerom-
eter has been used, using ?=arcsin(a
y
) as value for the
angle. Note that this axis is the most accurate to use for
deviations in the horizontal plane.
Fig. 8: Accelerometer on a multi-sensor interface board
mounted centrally in the mechanism
C. User interface
The user interface has been kept to a bare minimum
for this proof-of-principle. An analog joystick has been
5124
connected to the control electronics, where one of the
axes gives the control set point for the linear motors (the
four drive-motors) and the other axis gives the set point
to the rotational motors (the two motors tangent to the
pipe axis) as an offset for the stabilization control.
D. Active stabilization
A PID controller has been used to control the robot’s
orientation. Since damping in the system due to friction is
very high and the ﬁrst-order behavior is dominant, the D
action can be omitted. The velocity of the rotation motor
can be controlled (PWM controls voltage, for a running
motor which can be seen as a pure gyrator) equivalent
to the velocity) while position (orientation) is measured.
Hence the encoder acts as a ’hidden’ integrator. Instead of
derivingavelocity signal(withthe possible addednoise by
adding a differentiator) the choice has been made just to
use the controller withposition feedback and areasonably
large feedback gain.
As stated in the introduction, goal of this work is not to
design an optimal controller for the discussed prototype,
rather than have a working proof-of-principle in order to
investigate possibilities.
All data (timestamp, set points, motor current, ac-
celerometer data and encoder data) has been outputted
serially at 50Hz and is shown in the graphs in the next
section.
IV. RESULTS
The clamping force of passive clamping mechanism has
been tested using spring balance and digital scales. The
force exerted by the passive spring equals 7.2 N inside
the 125mm pipe. Experiments show that this is enough
force for traction but still slip occurs in both translation as
rotational direction. Three tests in short 125mm diameter
pipe segments are described here. The robot mechanism
drives trough a straight section clear acrylic pipe with
minimal disturbance, followed by a test drive in a straight
section with a large disturbance. In the last test a bend
with a large (4D) radius has been used.
A. Straight section
The robot is entered in the pipe drives 80 cm forward
and back. Figure 9 shows the experimental setup. Fig-
ure 10 and ﬁgure 11 show the measurement data obtained
in this drive. The forward velocity is quite high compared
with previous prototypes: 0.8m/4sec = 0.20m/s. The ac-
celerometer data shows a lot of noise. These might be
contributed to the uneven surface of the wheels caused by
the individual rollers. The deviation between the encoder
data (purple) and the accelerometer data (green) is caused
by the slip of the roller wheels.
In a next experiment two times a large disturbance of
90
?
is introduced by rolling the pipe with the robot over
the table (shown in 12 at t=4.5s and t=8s) . This is of
course a disturbance highly unlikely to occur in real life,
however, it shows the capability for quick recovery of the
system. The results are shown in ﬁgure 12.
Fig. 9: Robot in a 125 mm transparant pipe
Fig. 10: Straight drive with minimal disturbance, transla-
tion of the robot including total motor current
Finally a test run has been made in a bend in 125mm
pipe with a radius of 4D shown in ﬁgure 13. As to be
expected, for this range the mechanism does not behave
any differently from driving in the straight pipe. However,
rotation becomes more difﬁcult since the mechanism has
a preferred orientation.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a novel design for a pipe inspection
robot using omnidirectional wheels with active balancing
control. This setup allows for a very intuitive mapping to
user control (rotation and translation in the pipe) which is
its main beneﬁt compared with earlier prototypes which
had to relay of a series of clamping and unclamping
motions in order to conduct an axial rotation in a pipe.
A proof of principle setup has shown the possibilities
of the control, as well as maneuvering in a straight
120mm pipe and a smooth bend with a radius of 4D.
Experiments have been done with the outline of the robot
andthepositioning ofthewheelsﬁndingthemostsuitable
distribution of contact points.
In the presented prototype the active clamping mech-
anism has been omitted for sake of simplicity, but this
mechanismhasbeenimplemented inearlierworkandwill
have to be incorporated in the following model. This will
be a necessary step to conduct and verify the capabilities
of the earlier prototype, being inclinations, sharper bends
and a right-angle T-junction.
5125
Fig. 11: Straight drive with minimal disturbance, rotation
of the robot
Fig. 12: Rotation in a 125mm pipe with two large distur-
bances
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The PIRATE project is a joint collaboration between
KIWA Netherlands, ALSTOM Inspection Robotics, Switzer-
land, University of Twente and network operators Cogas,
Enexis, Endinet and Liander. Project information can be
found on http://www.inspectierobot.nl.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Dertien and S. Stramigioli. Basic maneuvers for an inspection
robot for small diameter gas distribution mains. In Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International Conference on, pages
3447–3448, 2011.
Fig. 13: Robot concept in 125 mm bend with radius of 4D
[2] E. Dertien, S. Stramigioli, and K. Pulles. Development of an inspec-
tion robot for small diameter gas distribution mains. In Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International Conference on,
pages 5044–5049, 2011.
[3] Se gon Roh and Hyouk Ryeol Choi. Differential-drive in-pipe robot
for differential-drive in-pipe robot for moving inside urban gas
pipelines. IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ROBOTICS,, 21(1), 2005.
[4] Shigeo Hirose, Hidetaka Ohno, Takeo Mitsui, and Kiichi Suyama.
Design of in-pipe inspection vehicles for ?25, ?50, ?150 pipes.
In Robotics and Automation, 1999. Proceedings. 1999 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on, volume 3, pages 2309–2314. IEEE, 1999.
[5] Ho Moon Kim, Jung Seok Suh, Yun Seok Choi, Tran Duc Trong,
Hyungpil Moon, Jachoon Koo, Sungmoo Ryew, and Hyouk Ryeol
Choi. An in-pipe robot with multi-axial differential gear mecha-
nism. In Robotics and Automation, 2013. Proceedings. ICRA ’13.
2013 IEEE International Conference on, 2013.
[6] Zheng Liu and Yehuda Kleiner. State of the art review of inspection
technologiesfor conditionassessmentofwaterpipes. Measurement,
46(1):1 – 15, 2013.
[7] W. Neubauer. A spider-like robot that climbs vertically in ducts
or pipes. In Intelligent Robots and Systems ’94. ’Advanced Robotic
Systemsandthe RealWorld’, IROS ’94. Proceedingsof theIEEE/RSJ/GI
InternationalConference on, volume 2, pages 1178–1185 vol.2, 1994.
[8] G.A. Pratt and M.M. Williamson. Series elastic actuators. In
Intelligent Robots and Systems 95. ’Human Robot Interaction and
Cooperative Robots’, Proceedings. 1995 IEEE/RSJ International Con-
ference on, volume 1, pages 399–406 vol.1, 1995.
[9] C.Pulles, E. C.Dertien, H.J. vandePol, andR. Nispeling. Pirate, the
development of an autonomous gas distribution system inspection
robot. In International Gas union Research Conference, IGRC 2008,
Paris, France, USA, October 2008. Curan Associates.
[10] Nur Shahida Roslin, Adzly Anuar, Muhammad Fairuz Abdul Jalal,
and Khairul Salleh Mohamed Sahari. A review: Hybrid locomotion
of in-pipe inspection robot. Procedia Engineering, 41(0):1456 –
1462, 2012. <ce:title>International Symposium on Robotics and
Intelligent Sensors 2012 (IRIS 2012)</ce:title>.
[11] K. Tadakuma, R. Tadakuma, Keiji Nagatani, Kazuya Yoshida, S. Pe-
ters, Martin Udengaard, and K. Iagnemma. Crawler vehicle with
circular cross-section unit to realize sideways motion. In Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems, 2008. IROS 2008. IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, pages 2422–2428, 2008.
[12] Pieter van Vollenhoven. Gasexplosie na breuk van gasdistributielei-
ding. Technical report, Raad voor de transportveiligheid, 2002.
[13] George C. Vradis and William Leary. Development of an inspec-
tion platform and a suite of sensors for assessing corrosion and
mechanical damage on unpiggable transmission mains. Technical
report, Foster Miller, March 2004.
[14] C. Wright, Austin Buchan, B. Brown, J. Geist, M. Schwerin,
D. Rollinson, Matthew Tesch, and H. Choset. Design and ar-
chitecture of the uniﬁed modular snake robot. In Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on, pages
4347–4354, 2012.
[15] E. Zwicker, W. Zesch, and R. Moser. A modular inspection robot
platform for power plant applications. In Applied Robotics for the
PowerIndustry(CARPI), 2010 1st International Conference on, pages
1–6, 2010.
5126
