  
? 
Abstract— The concentric-tube continuum robot generates 
distal end motions by translating and rotating the proximal ends 
of pre-curved tubes that overlap concentrically. This robot does 
not require additional actuators along the tubes because the 
overall curvature and distal end position are determined solely 
by interactions between the inner and outer tubes. However, 
under certain conditions, the rotation of the distal end is 
hindered as the actuation energy accumulates into torsional 
energy of the tubes. As the distal ends are rotated further, the 
accumulated energy from the twisting is suddenly released, 
which makes the tubes snap to a remote position. This is called 
the snapping problem, and it considerably limits the 
performance of the robot. In this paper, we propose a novel 
design for the concentric tubes to eliminate the snapping 
problem. The new design creates groove patterns on superelastic 
nitinol tubes to make the tubes more flexible to bending than 
twisting. Simulations and experiments were performed to verify 
that the tubes with our groove patterns had anisotropic 
structural characteristics, and video image analysis verified that 
this structural property can eliminate the snapping problem. A 
concentric-tube robot with this new tube design can have a 
larger workspace area because tubes with greater curvatures 
can be used without the snapping problem. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Recently, there has been intensive research on the 
concentric-tube continuum robot, so called active cannulas or 
steerable needle for minimally invasive surgery (MIS) [1]~[7]. 
The most distinctive characteristic of this type of robot is that 
its distal end is steered and advances through rotation and 
translation of the pre-curved tubes relative to each other. 
Actuators are attached to the proximal ends of the tubes, and 
no other actuators are required such as pull-wires or pneumatic 
pumps [8], [9]. Therefore, the position of the robot’s distal end 
and the robot’s shape along it length can be controlled purely 
by rotating and translating the base of the tubes. This implicit 
actuating unit and the structural simplicity allow for small-
scale design and give the robot great potential to be used as a 
new MIS instrument that incorporates the advantages of 
different types of conventional tools [10].  
Energy stored in the concentric-tube continuum robot 
composed of multiple tubes usually has one minimum point, 
which determines the equilibrium conformations of the robot. 
Under some special condition, however, the robot can have 
more than one minimum energy point and thus have an 
unstable configuration in this kind of multi-stable state. 
 
*This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of 
Korea (NRF) (2012-041247), the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future 
Planning(2013K000371), and KIST Institutional Program (2E24132). 
J. Kim and D. Lee are with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace 
Engineering, Seoul National University, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-
742, Korea  (e-mail: rubagi05@gmail.com; winter2nf@gmail. com) 
Webster et al. called this phenomenon a “bifurcation” because 
the minimum point is separated in the energy landscape under 
certain condition [5]. Bifurcation should be avoided to ensure 
patient safety because it can cause the robot to suddenly move 
to another minimum energy point (called “Snapping”) during 
operation. From a physical point of view, snapping occurs 
because of a burst of energy stored in the tubes. During relative 
rotational motion, the high bending stiffness and high 
curvature make the tube twist rather than bend, and the stacked 
energy makes the tube snap to a remote position. Therefore, 
either a control scheme needs to be specially designed, or the 
curvature of the tubes needs to be limited to avoid these 
configurations. Limiting the curvature of the tubes lowers the 
performance of the robot by limiting its workspace.  
In this paper, we propose a new solution of making the 
tubes exhibit a lower bending stiffness to torsional stiffness 
ratio than normal isotropic tubes. This can be achieved by 
making grooves on the tube surface and reducing the bending 
stiffness more than the torsional stiffness. This method has 
been widely used for many medical instruments to improve 
their performances through both intuition and qualitative 
analysis. The most well-known example of a grooved tube is 
the guide wire inserted through a human vessel. Boston 
Scientific Corporation uses a microfabrication process that 
cuts minute slices in small-diameter nitinol tubes to improve 
the performance of a guide wire to access tortuous vasculature 
[11]. Haga et al. used femtosecond laser processing on a 
superelastic nitinol tube to fabricate a spring-shaped shape 
memory alloy (SMA) micro-coil with a square cross-section 
that bends easily [12]. Ryu et al. designed the flexible part of 
an SMA tube to have a series of slits with rounded ends to bend 
the needle preferentially in one direction under actuation [13]. 
There are several methods to process a cylindrical nitinol 
substrate. Most currently available stents are fabricated by 
laser cutting from nitinol tubing [14]. An alternative method to 
produce patterns with very thin struts is sputter deposition of 
nitinol [15]. The anisotropic material property can be 
generated by locally annealing nitinol micro-devices [16]. 
Electrochemical pulse etching is another method to fabricate 
complex microstructures from nitinol sheet [17]. In this paper, 
we adopted laser cutting to make grooves on superelastic 
nitinol tubes because it is appropriate for tubes at the robot’s 
scale and ensures design flexibility [18].  
K. Kim and S. Kang are with the Center for Bionics, Korea Institute of 
Science and Technology, Hawolgok-dong, Wolsong-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, 
Seoul, 136-791, Korea (e-mail: jazzpian@kist.re.kr; kasch804@gmail.com) 
K. Cho is with the School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, 
Seoul National University, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Korea 
(phone: +82-2-880-1663; fax: +82-2-880-1663; e-mail: kjcho@snu.ac.kr) 
Toward a Solution to the Snapping Problem in a Concentric-Tube  
Continuum Robot: Grooved Tubes with Anisotropy 
Ji-Suk Kim, Dae-Young Lee, Student Member, IEEE, Keri Kim, Sungchul Kang, and Kyu-Jin Cho, 
Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5871
  
We verified the assumption that the tube anisotropy 
derived from the laser-cut surface grooves would alleviate or 
even eliminate the snapping problem in a concentric-tube 
continuum robot. The proposed method is a possible solution 
to the critical snapping problem in this type of robot. If the 
mechanical properties of the tubes can be modified as desired 
in further study, this method can offer some insights into the 
design of other tube-type medical devices. 
II. ANALYSIS 
A. Review of Snapping Problem 
Bifurcation occurs when the difference between the input 
angles of the overlapped tubes increases. Another local 
minimum appears separately in the energy landscape and 
becomes the global minimum as the present local minimum 
point disappears. The tube suddenly rotates to the new 
minimum energy point because of this phenomenon. This kind 
of movement is potentially dangerous, and avoiding 
bifurcation is a key parameters that should be considered in 
robot design. 
To avoid this phenomenon, Dupont et al. [4] and Webster 
et al. [6] analyzed the conditions that generate bifurcation. 
Both research teams analyzed the “two tube case” and derived 
the same equation. Inequality (1) shows the condition to avoid 
this phenomenon. When the tube design satisfies (1), the robot 
will always have only one energy minimum point, which 
means that the robot can be stable for the whole work space. 
? √? 1
? 2
? 2
? 2
? 2
? 2
+ 
? 2
? 2
? 1
? 1
 
? 1
? 1
? 1
? 1
1+
? 2
? 2
? 1
? 1
< 
? 2
                       (1) 
L is the length of the overlapped part, ? 1
 and ? 2
 are the 
curvatures of the two tubes, E is the elastic modulus, G is the 
shear modulus, and I and J are the area moment and polar 
moment of inertia, respectively. As shown in (1), the curvature 
and the overlapped length of the tube strongly affect the 
occurrence of bifurcation. 
Having small values for the curvature and overlapped 
length would satisfy the above inequality and avoid bifurcation. 
However, limiting both values limits the workspace of the 
robot. The next target is the value of EI/GJ. Based on (1), 
EI/GJ has much more influence than the value E 2I 2/E 1I 1. To 
understand the meaning of the equation more intuitively, we 
assume that the inner and outer tubes have the same curvature 
and material properties, so (1) can be simplified as follows.  
?? √
??
??
< 
? 2
                                    (2) 
Inequality (2) indicates that reducing EI/GJ can satisfy this 
condition and eliminate the bifurcation. Therefore, this term 
should be modified for the robot design if the overlapped 
length and curvature of the tubes are set as constant. 
B. Tube Patterning Method 
In a homogeneous isotropic linear elastic material, the 
following equation holds, where ? is Poisson’s ratio. 
? = 2(1 + ? )?                                 (3) 
From the perpendicular axis theorem, equation (4) also 
holds. 
2? = ?                                         (4) 
Therefore, in a homogeneous symmetrical material, EI/GJ 
is always equal to 1+?. In other words, EI/GJ cannot be 
modified simply by changing the dimensions of the tube. The 
most feasible way to change EI/GJ is to cut certain patterns 
into the tube’s surface. In this study, we induced anisotropic 
characteristics by making grooves on the tube via laser 
machining. Although the inherent material property cannot be 
changed on an infinitesimal scale, the specially designed 
pattern shown in Fig. 1 can make a tube anisotropic as a whole. 
The anisotropy occurs so that the bending stiffness is reduced 
by more than the torsional stiffness; this allows a robot to be 
designed with much fewer constraints while still satisfying (1) 
than a design using normal tubes.  
To test the effects of the pattern, a simulation was 
performed using the simulation software ANSYS. Because the 
bending stiffness EI and torsional stiffness GJ of the grooved 
tube are impossible to calculate analytically, (5) and (6) were 
used to estimate EI and GJ [19]. These values were calculated 
by applying a force F or moment M, respectively, to the distal 
end of the tube and then measuring the displacement d, or 
rotation angle ?, respectively. l is the length of the tube 
specimen. 
?? = 
? ? 3
3 ?                                      (5) 
?? = 
??
?                                      (6) 
The outer and inner diameters of the simulated tube were 
3.62 and 3.33 mm (the same sizes as the outer tube used in the 
actual experiment). Three patterns were placed on each 
circumference, and the center positions alternated line by line. 
Fig. 1 shows the shape of the pattern, and Table I shows the 
dimensions of the pattern used in the simulation. Vertically 
long pattern with the tube direction is likely to produce a 
weaker bending stiffness compared to torsional stiffness, and 
the ends of the pattern had a circular shape to reduce stress 
concentration. The pattern design was designed under two 
main considerations: (1) minimize EI/GJ of the processed tube, 
TABLE I.  DIMENSIONS OF PATTERN DESIGN 
 x A x B x C x D 
Size 2 mm 0.25 mm 0.25 mm 1 mm 
TABLE II.  SIMULATION RESULTS 
 
Bending 
Stiffness, EI 
Torsion 
Stiffness, GJ 
EI/GJ 
Normal Tube 180.7 mN ? m
2
 133.3 mN ? m
2
 1.35 
Grooved Tube 5.9 mN ? m
2
 14.9 mN ? m
2
 0.40 
Normal Tube 
/Grooved Tube 
3.3% 11.2% 29.6% 
 
  
Figure 1.  Shape of pattern and its design parameters. 
 
5872
  
and (2) reduce the stress concentration at both ends of the 
pattern under external loads. There was a tradeoff between 
these two requirements to some level, but an optimal design 
can be obtained by adjusting the shape and position of the 
pattern because it has many design parameters. This will be 
carried out in future work; in the present study, we used a 
representative pattern design as our focus was on whether this 
method can alleviate the snapping phenomenon.  
The simulation result are summarized in Table II, where 
we compare the grooved tube with the normal tube. The 
simulation results showed that EI/GJ was reduced to 29.6% of 
its original value. 
III. FABRICATION 
A Nd:YVO 4 laser system (wavelength of 355 nm, pulse 
duration of 30 ns, repetition rate of 100 kHz) was used to cut 
the pattern in the superelastic tubes. The maximum cutting 
depth of nitinol was about 150 ?m with a maximum laser 
power of 2.6 W, scanner speed of 40 mm/s, and 40 repetition 
times. Therefore, the thickness of the tubes (supplied by 
Johnson Matthey Co Ltd.) was less than 150 ?m. Although 
these tubes are thinner than those previously used for the tube 
continuum robots, the thickness of the tubes is irrelevant to the 
bifurcation phenomenon. 
A.  Tube Machining Process 
The desired pattern spanned the tube’s surface along the 
radial and axial directions. A particular system was required to 
cut the pattern into the curved surface with minimum 
distortion. Ideally, the rotation of the tube would be 
synchronized with the laser scanner movement to allow for 
continuous patterning, but this is technically demanding. To 
simplify the procedure, only one-sixth of the surface was 
processed at a time; the tube was then rotated 60°for further 
processing, and this was repeated for six times. As shown in 
Fig 2, a rotary motor stage (Unice E-O Service Inc., Taiwan) 
was used to precisely rotate the tube, a drill chuck fixed the 
tube, a cone-shaped bearing support prevented bending and 
twisting of the tube, and a linear guide fixed various tube 
lengths. A CCD camera (USB 2.0, Color 5MP CMOS camera, 
Mightex Systems, Pleasanton, CA, USA) was placed above 
the specimen to monitor dislocations of the tube after rotation, 
and an optoelectronic displacement measurement system 
(Micro-Epsilon, opto-NCDT 1402) was used to calibrate the 
tube’s vertical position and focal length of the laser beam. Fig. 
3 shows the laser-machined results. 
B. Annealing Process 
To curve the tubes, the normal tubes and grooved tubes 
were first placed in a box filled with dry ice. At this 
temperature, the tubes stayed in the martensite state, so they 
were much more compliant and easy to place in an aluminum 
mold. This mold was then placed in an air furnace at 520 º C 
for 30 min followed by quenching in water. The annealing 
result and aluminum mold are shown in Fig. 4.   
IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS 
The tube properties were measured to verify that the ratio 
of the bending stiffness to the torsional stiffness had changed. 
After the change in stiffness ratio of the patterned tube was 
verified, both the inner and outer tubes were curved and rotated 
within one another to observe whether snapping occurred. 
A. Measurement of material properties of tubes 
Fig. 5 shows the experimental setups for measuring the 
bending stiffness and torsional stiffness. In the bending test, a 
tensile tester (R&B Micro lad RB302) was used; in the torsion 
test, a torque sensor (Transducer techniques TRT-50) and 
high-precision servo motor (Robotis H54-100) were used. A 
drill chuck was used to fix the tube specimens in both 
experiments. 
Table III shows the dimensions of the tubes used in the 
experiments. There were some issues with measuring the 
normal tube specimen. Because the normal tube had high 
stiffness, it was likely to be crushed at the point where the load 
was applied during the bending test, and slip can occur 
 
Figure 2.  Laser machining setup for tube patterning. 
  
Figure 3.  Laser-machined tube specimen. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Annealed tubes and aluminum mold for annealing process. 
 
5873
  
between the drill chuck and tube. To minimize the error caused 
by these issues, the tube specimen should be as long as 
possible. However, a longer tube makes it more difficult to 
align the tubes. Thus, we used a relatively long normal tube 
for the bending test and a shorter normal tube for the torsion 
test. In the torsion test, we prevented slip by using epoxy-based 
rough mounts at both ends of the specimen.  
Figs. 6 and 7 show the experimental result. Because tubes 
with different lengths were used, the graph for the bending test 
(Fig. 6) plots Fl
2
/3 versus y/l for intuitive comparison of the 
bending stiffness. The graph for the torsion test (Fig. 7) plots 
M versus ?/l for the same reason. Each experiment was 
conducted twice and produced almost the same results. The 
graph shows a dramatic reduction in the bending stiffness and 
torsional stiffness of the grooved tubes compared to the normal 
tubes. The results are summarized in Table IV. The bending 
stiffness and torsional stiffness were estimated by calculating 
the mean values of the slopes in the graphs. 
EI/GJ was reduced from 1.49 to 0.57. The experimental 
results showed a discrepancy with the simulation results. We 
speculate that the crushing of the tube in the bending test and 
slipping of the tube in the torsion test may have caused this 
error. In addition, we set the Young’s modulus of the material 
based on information provided by the manufacturer, but the 
actual values can be different.  Even though the simulation 
could not accurately predict the result, the main idea that the 
pattern can reduce EI/GJ still holds.  
B. Tube rotation test 
To verify our concept, tube rotation tests were conducted. 
Two pre-curved tubes with different diameters were 
overlapped and rotated with respect to each other by 360°. For 
the normal tubes, snapping was observed. For the patterned 
tubes, the patterns interfered with each other and hindered the 
smooth translation or rotation. To solve this issue, a highly 
abrasion-resistant polytetrafluoro ethylene (PTFE) tubing 
(supplied by Myungsung FEC Co Ltd., South Korea) was 
inserted between the inner and outer nitinol. Normal tubes with 
exactly the same dimensions and curvatures were prepared to 
compare the rotation result. Tables V and VI show the 
dimensions of the nitinol tubes and the PTFE tube between 
them, and Figs. 8 and 9 show the specimens used in the 
experiment.  
 
Figure 5.  Experimental setup for tube property measurement: (left) 
bending test setup and (right) torsion test setup. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Results of the bending test. The graph plots FL
2
/3 versus y/L, 
so the slope represents the bending stiffness.  
 
TABLE V.  DIMENSIONS OF TUBES USED IN TUBE ROTATION TEST 
 Inner Tube 
Middle Tube 
(PTFE) 
Outer Tube 
Outer Dia. 2.65 mm 3.00 mm 3.62 mm 
Inner Dia. 2.35 mm 2.50 mm 3.33 mm 
TABLE VI.  GEOMETY OF TUBES USED IN EXPRIMENTS 
 
Radius of 
Curvature 
Patterned Length 
(Only for 
patterned tube) 
Curved 
Length 
Straight 
Length 
Inner Tube 40 mm 50 mm 50 mm 180 mm 
Outer Tube 40 mm 50 mm 50 mm 100 mm 
 
TABLE III.  DIMENSIONS OF TUBES USED IN PROPERTY TEST 
 Inner Dia. Outer Dia. Length 
Bending Normal Tube 
3.33 mm 3.62 mm 
89.6 mm 
Bending with Groove 40.7 mm 
Torsion Normal Tube 30.0 mm 
Torsion with Groove 38.2 mm 
 
 
Figure 7.  Results of torsion test. The graph plots M versus ?/l, so the 
slope represents the torsional stiffness.  
TABLE IV.  EXPERIMENTAL RESULT OF TUBE PROPERTY TEST 
 Bending 
Stiffness, EI 
(Simulation) 
Torsion 
Stiffness, GJ 
(Simulation) 
EI/GJ 
(Simulation) 
Normal Tube 
109.4 mN ? m
2
 
(180.7 mN ? m
2
) 
73.1 mN ? m
2
 
(133.3 mN ? m
2
) 
1.49 
(1.35) 
Grooved 
Tube 
4.2 mN ? m
2
 
(5.9 mN ? m
2
) 
7.4 mN ? m
2
 
(14.9 mN ? m
2
) 
0.57 
(0.40) 
Grooved tube 
/Normal tube 
3.83% 
(3.3%) 
10.1% 
(11.2%) 
38.2% 
(29.6%) 
 
5874
  
The experimental setup in Fig. 10 was used to generate 
relative rotational motion of the tubes. Collet chucks were used 
to grip the tubes, and motors (Maxon Motors, RE25, 20 W) 
were used to rotate the tubes. In the experiment, two tubes 
were fully overlapped; one tube was fixed, and the other tube 
was rotated. The movement of the distal end of the continuum 
robot was recorded by a video camera, and the trace data of the 
distal end was acquired using visual analysis software (Xcitex, 
ProAnalyst).  
Fig. 11 shows the visual tracking results. The green and red 
marks show the traced distal ends of the normal and grooved 
tubes, respectively. The left figure shows the trace of the 
normal tubes, and the right figure shows the trace of the 
grooved tubes. The left figure shows a snapping point that 
remains blank in the trace, while the right figure shows a 
continuous trace of the red line, which means that snapping did 
not occur. The trace data were rearranged and plotted by 
setting the input angle to 0 º when the curve directions of the 
two tubes were aligned with each other. Fig. 12 shows that the 
snapping occurred in normal tubes at around 180 º of the input 
angle, and the tubes suddenly rotated by 20 º at that point. 
These results indicate that the snapping phenomenon can be 
prevented by using the grooved tubes with anisotropic 
properties. 
V. DISCUSSION 
When applying the concept of using grooved nitinol tubes 
for the concentric-tube continuum robot, the foremost issue 
was moving the processed tubes relative to each other. 
Because the tubes are grooved, curved, and overlapped, the 
grooves seriously hinder the relative translational and 
rotational motions of both tubes. Sometimes the tubes become 
interlocked and completely stuck together, which makes it 
almost impossible to make further movements without 
breaking them. Therefore, the PTFE tube between the two 
tubes is an essential structural component in our concept. 
However, the additional tubing inevitably makes the whole 
structure bulkier, and the PTFE tube starts to become abraded 
after a few repeated operations. This problem can be solved by 
using two ultra-thin heat shrink PTFE tubing: one on the outer 
surface of the inner tube and the other on the inner surface of 
the outer tube. 
The next issue was the dramatic variation in mechanical 
properties of the tubes. As shown in the simulation and 
experimental result, the grooved tube had much less stiffness 
compared to the normal tube, which can be a drawback of this 
method. However, the reduction ratio can be controlled by 
pattern design, and also the grooved region can be resized 
based on specific requirements. Moreover, this characteristic 
can be a method to build a dominating stiffness tube pair, 
which is one of the control scheme of the tube continuum robot 
[1]. For practical application, this characteristic need to be 
studied in all its aspects. 
 
Figure 10. Experimental setup for tube rotation test. Snapping movement 
was observed by visual analysis. 
 
Figure 12. Resultant graph of video analysis. The normal tubes showed 
snapping at an input angle of around 180°. The snapping angle 
was about 20°. 
 
 
Figure 11. Video analysis of distal tracking. Green marks (left) show the 
traced distal end of the normal tubes, and red marks (right) show 
the traced distal end of the grooved tube. The left figure shows 
the snapping movement. 
 
Figure 8.  Normal (left) and grooved (right) tubes for tube rotation test. 
All four tubes had the same curvature. 
 
Figure 9.   Assembled shape of grooved tube with PTFE tube. The PTFE 
tube was used to reduce the inter-locking between the inner and 
outer grooved tubes. 
 
5875
  
Finally, the grooved patterns should be optimized to 
determine the most desirable combination of decreased EI/GJ 
and decreased stress concentration under external loads. The 
pattern has four design parameters, and the pattern shape or 
parameters can be changed to determine the optimal design for 
specific tube dimensions. In this way, the snapping problem 
can be overcome while maintaining the robot’s steering ability 
without compromising its workspace. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
We demonstrated that making certain groove patterns on 
superelastic nitinol tubes can be one solution to the snapping 
problem in concentric-tube continuum robots. Two sets of 
tubes with the same specifications, where one set was 
patterned and the other was not, showed different behavior 
under continuous rotation: the normal tubes snapped, while 
the grooved ones did not. Although the feasibility of our 
method was demonstrated, some issues remain regarding the 
interlocking, and pattern optimization. In addition, the effect 
of large variations for the stiffness of the tube should be 
analyzed carefully. Provided that these issues are resolved, 
our approach can be implemented in the design of the 
concentric-tube continuum robots to allow for more freedom 
in the workspace and trajectory. This approach may also be 
used for other cylindrical medical devices.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Kwang-Koo Jee for the annealing 
process of nitinol tubes and Tae-Young Choi for experimental 
support. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Patrick and P. Dupont. "A steerable needle technology using curved 
concentric tubes." Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on, pp. 2850-2856, 2006. 
[2] R. J. Webster III, A. M. Okamura, and N. J. Cowan. "Toward active 
cannulas: Miniature snake-like surgical robots." Intelligent Robots and 
Systems (IROS), IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 2857-
2863, 2006. 
[3] D. C. Rucker and R. J. Webster, “Parsimonious evaluation of 
concentric-tube continuum robot equilibrium conformation,” 
Biomedical Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 
2308-2311, 2009. 
[4] P. Dupont, J. Lock, E. Butler, “Torsional Kinematic Model for 
Concentric Tube Robots,” Robotics and Automation (ICRA), IEEE 
International Conference on, pp. 3851-3858, 2009. 
[5] R. J. Webster, J. M. Romano and N. J. Cowan, “Mechanics of 
precurved-tube continuum robots,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, 
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 67-78, 2009. 
[6] D. C. Rucker, R. J. Webster, G. S. Chirikjian and N. J. Cowan, 
“Equilibrium conformations of concentric-tube continuum robots,” 
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 10, pp. 
1263-1280, 2010 
[7] P. E. Dupont, J. Lock, B. Itkowitz and E. Butler, “Design and Control 
of Concentric-Tube Robots,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 26, 
no. 2, pp. 209-225, 2010. 
[8] Y. Fu, H. Liu, W. Huang, S. Wang and Z. Liang, “Steerable catheters 
in minimally invasive vascular surgery,” The International Journal of 
Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted Surgery, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 
381-391, 2009. 
 
[9] K. Ikuta, H. Ichikawa, K. Suzuki and D. Yajima, “Multi-degree of 
freedom hydraulic pressure driven safety active catheter,” Robotics 
and Automation (ICRA), 2006 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 
4161-4166, 2006. 
[10] N. V. Vasilyev, A. H. Gosline, E. Butler, N. Lang, P.J. Codd, H. 
Yamauchi, E. N. Feins, C. R. Folk, A. L. Cohen, R. Chen, D. 
Zurakowski, P. J. Nido P. E. Dupont, “Percutaneous Steerable Robotic 
Tool Delivery Platform and Metal Microelectromechanical Systems 
Device for Tissue Manipulation and Approximation Closure of Patent 
Foramen Ovale in an Animal Model,” Circulation: Cardiovascular 
Interventions, 6(4), pp. 468-475, 2013. 
[11] http://www.bostonscientific.com/peripheral-
interventions/products.html#productDetailPage(10138011) 
[12] Y. Haga, Y. Muyari, S. Goto, T. Matsunaga and M. Esashi, 
“Development of Minimally Invasive Medical Tools Using Laser 
Processing on Cylindrical Substrates,” Electrical Engineering in 
Japan, vol. 176, no. 1, pp. 65-74, 2011. 
[13] S. C. Ryu, P. Renaud, R. J. Black, B. L. Daniel and M. R. Cutkosky, 
“Feasibility study of an optically actuated MR-compatible active 
needle,” Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on, pp. 2564-2569, 2011. 
[14] T. Duerig, D. Stoeckel and D. Johnson, “SMA: smart materials for 
medical applications,” European Workshop on Smart Structure in 
Engineering and Technology, International Society for Optics and 
Photonics, pp. 7-15, 2003. 
[15] V. Gupta, V. Martynov and A. D. Johnson, “Recent developments in 
SMA thin film based microactuators for biomedical and fiber optics 
applications,” Actuator, vol. 2002, pp. 355-358, 2002. 
[16] Y. Bellouard, T. Lehnert, J. E. Bidaux, T. Sidler, R. Clavel and R. 
Gotthardt, “Local annealing of complex mechanical devices: a new 
approach for developing monolithic micro-devices,” Materials 
Science and Engineering: A 273, pp. 795-798, 1999. 
[17] T. Mineta, T. Mitsui, Y. Watanabe, S. Kobayashi, Y. Haga and M. 
Esashi, “Batch fabricated flat meandering shape memory alloy 
actuator for active catheter,” Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, vol. 
88, no. 2, pp. 112-120, 2001. 
[18] A. T. Tung, B. H. Byung, G. Niemeyer and D. H. Liang, “Laser-
machined shape memory alloy actuators for active catheters,” 
Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 439-
446, 2007. 
[19] E. P. Popov, Engineering Mechanics of Solids, PHI Learning, 2009. 
5876
