Towards an Accurate Tracking of Liver Tumors for Augmented Reality
in Robotic Assisted Surgery
Nazim Haouchine
1
, Jeremie Dequidt
1
, Igor Peterlik
2
, Erwan Kerrien
3
Marie-Odile Berger
3
and Stephane Cotin
1
Abstract—This article introduces a method for tracking the
internalstructuresoftheliverduringrobot-assistedprocedures.
Vascular network, tumors and cut planes, computed from pre-
operative data, can be overlaid onto the laparoscopic view for
image-guidance,eveninthecaseoflargemotionordeformation
of the organ. Compared to current methods, our method is
able to precisely propagate surface motion to the internal
structures. This is made possible by relying on a fast yet
accurate biomechanical model of the liver combined with a
robust visual tracking approach designed to properly constrain
the model. Augmentation results are demonstrated on in-vivo
sequences of a human liver during robotic surgery, while
quantitative validation is performed on an ex-vivo porcine liver
experimentation. Validation results show that our approach
gives an accurate surface registration with an error of less
than 6mm on the position of the tumor.
I. INTRODUCTION
Considerable recent advances in medicine have made
Minimally Invasive Surgery (MIS) a well-established proce-
dure for hepatic surgery, with strong beneﬁts for patients.
However, the reduced endoscopic ﬁeld of view, the lack
of depth and tactile perception make hepatic resection and
tumor removal a major challenge that requires advanced
surgical skills. Augmented Reality (AR) techniques have
the potential to counteract these regressions and provide an
enriched visual feedback by the seamless integration of intra-
operative images and any targets or risk structures, such as
tumors or vessels, visible in 3D pre-operative imaging (cf
Figure 1).
Developing a full AR system for MIS implies solving
a number of difﬁcult problems, ranging from instrument
tracking to intuitive augmented visualization [1]. Among the
most difﬁcult and still unsolved issues is the capacity to
tackle, in real time, large elastic deformations on the targeted
organ. Though the problem of elastic registration or track-
ing has been largely addressed in the medical community,
elastic deformation in AR systems is only addressed, to our
knowledge, in a very limited number of papers, and mainly
applied to 3 organs: kidney, heart and liver.
Kidneys do not actually undergo elastic deformations
during surgery but rather move independently from their
1
Nazim Haouchine, Jeremie Dequidt and Stephane Cotin are with INRIA
and Lille University, France nazim.haouchine@inria.fr,
jeremie.dequidt@inria.fr,stephane.cotin@inria.fr
2
Igor Peterlik is with Image-guided Minimally Invasive Surgery Institute,
IHU Strasbourg, France peterlik@gmail.com
3
Erwan Kerrien and Marie-Odile Berger are with INRIA and
Lorraine University, Nancy, France erwan.kerrien@inria.fr,
marie-odile.berger@inria.fr
Fig. 1. Augmented Liver Tumor during Minimally Invasive Surgery. Top:
The registration of the liver mesh including the tumor onto endoscopic
images. Bottom: Computational ﬂow of the method.
surrounding tissues. As such, related works resort to a rigid
3D-3D registration e.g. based on implanted markers [2] or
an Iterative Closest Point (ICP) surface matching [3]. Re-
cently Puerto-Souza et al. [4] proposed a Hierarchical Multi-
Afﬁne matching algorithm capable of long-term tracking
for augmentation during partial nephrectomy. This approach
estimates a set of afﬁne transformations from clusters of
features in order to relocate occluded or missing features
to obtain a coherent spatio-temporal mesh registration. Figl
et al. [5] also express the non-rigid registration problem as a
rigidregistrationbetweenstereoscopicviewsanda4Dmodel
of the heart built from 4D scan data, thus leveraging the
cyclicity of the organ motion. A 4D scan of the heart is also
used in [6], but is coupled with a biomechanical model to
relate the surface motion to internal forces. A local tuning
of the deformation is therefore possible and the surface
deformation is correctly propagated to in-depth invisible
structures. No periodic or rigid pattern can be relied upon
in the liver case. Unpredictable, possibly large, deformations
can be observed. Furthermore, volume tracking is required
since we are interested in in-depth augmentation whereas
many approaches are dedicated to the tracking of surfaces.
In a similar context, Kim et al. [7] propose a solution that is
bothapplicableinamonoscopicsetupandintegratesarobust
imagefeaturereconstructionapproach.Buttheirmethodonly
retrieves surface deformation and cannot ensure an accurate
augmentation of inner structures.
Mechanical-based deformable models have proven to be
relevant for volume deformation since they allow to deﬁne
elastic properties of the shape and thus to infer in-depth
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4121
structure motion [8], [9], [10]. Registration is done either
by solving mechanical equations given image constraints
provided by reconstructed 3D points [8] or using the concept
of active models where an energy is minimized which takes
into account the internal behavior of the model -through the
biomechanical constraints- and external image constraints
that measure the adequation between the model and the
recovered 3D data [9], [10].
The work presented here is an improvement of the former
work on AR for deformable organs [13], [12]. In these
works, a method employing a biomechanical model guided
by a stereo-based tracking algorithm which is able to in-
terpolate in the volume surface deformations was proposed.
The physical model used, provably adapted to the liver
[11], is superimposed in real-time onto the laparoscopic
images within tumors. In this paper we mainly focus on
the reconstruction and the selection of 3D points which are
used to guide the physical model. In particular, techniques
based on moving least-squares are used to improve the set of
recovered 3D points. We also restrict the set of points which
are used to guide the mechanical model using clustering
techniques with signiﬁcant impact on the accuracy and the
robustness of the method. With respect to existing works,
we improve upon [8] by proposing a method that does not
demand a computationally expensive stereo surface recovery
and upon [4] by performing a robust and long-term tracking
whichisabletohandleelasticdeformationsoftheorgan.The
validation of our approach is presented on both in vivo and
ex vivo data where we report visually accurate registration
on images of an actual laparoscopic procedure and show that
the error between the estimated and actual positions of an
artiﬁcial tumor implanted in a porcine liver is less than 6mm.
II. STEREOSCOPIC FLOW ESTIMATION
Theuseofabiomechanicalmodeltopropagatethesurface
motion to the internal structures not visible on the endo-
scopic images, , such as tumors, requires a stable tracking
sufﬁciently robust with respect to the image noise. For
that purpose, we propose a new tracking method designed
to guide the physically-based model. Our tracking method
follows these steps:
• Sparse three-dimensional recovery from stereoscopic
images.
• Moving Least-Squares-based outliers ﬁltering and sur-
face approximation.
• Control point selection with clustering and temporal
ﬂow estimation.
A. Sparse three-dimensional recovery
Intra-abdominal surface reconstruction has been under
investigation in several research groups (for a complete
survey, please refer to [17]). The methods range from pas-
sive techniques [19], [21] based only on endoscopic image
informations, to active techniques [20], [22] that involve
hardware modiﬁcations. Our method relies on a passive
approach using a stereo endoscope, calibrated according to
Zhang’s [18] approach. Features are detected in each image
Fig. 2. MLS-based surface recovery. Left: Three-dimensional sparse
point cloud recovery. Right: outliers ﬁltering and surface reconstruction
using MLS, the control points selected after clustering are registered to the
biomechanical model of the liver
pair (rectiﬁed for distortion) using the Speeded-Up Robust
Features (SURF) descriptor and are tracked over time thanks
to the Lucas-Kanade optical ﬂow method, this coupling has
proven to be optimal for laparoscopic surgery [14]. Feature
correspondences between stereo images are obtained with
a nearest neighbour criterion on feature descriptors coupled
with the epipolar constraint. A sparse set of m 3D points,
denoted by 3?m coordinate vector z, is reconstructed by
triangulation.
Examples of 2D matched features and reconstructed 3D
points from laparoscopic images are shown in Figure 3.
B. Moving Least-Squares-based surface reconstruction
The sparse set z of recovered 3D points may contain
erroneous points. In order to remove these points and to
obtain a smoother point set z
?
we take beneﬁts of the MLS
surface to approximate a surface and to detect the noisy
points.
Moving Least-Squares surface (MLS) is a mesh-free, non-
parametric method to approximate a surface from a set of
unstructured scattered point introduced by [16].
To determine the MLS surface given a point set
P= {p
i
?R
3
}, a projection procedure which projects any
points near the point set onto the surface using a local
approximation is conducted. Given a point r ? R
3
, the
process follows two steps. First the computation of a local
patch, then the projection of the query point r onto the
surface using a polynomial function :
• Compute a local reference plane in the neighborhood of
r : Find a plane H with normal vector a?R
3
passing
through some point q= r+ta (for some t ?R) such
that kak=1 and H minimizes the least-squares error:
∑
p
i
?P
<a,p
i
?q>
2
?(kp
i
?qk) (1)
Here, <a,p
i
?q>
2
is the squared distance from each
point {p
i
} to the plane H, and ?(kp
i
?qk) is the
weighting function, usually a Gaussian.
• Project r on the surface : We consider the points x
i
to be
the orthogonal projections of the points p
i
on the plane
H with projected distance f
i
=< a,p
i
?q > oriented
with normal a and origin q. Thus, we apply the MLS
4122
Fig. 3. Stereoscopic ﬂow estimation on laparoscopic images of the abdominal cavity showing a part of the liver in two different cases with (top) high
textured liver and (bottom) low textured liver: (a) Original input images, (b) the resulting sparse 3D point set z from stereo matching, (c) the resulting
sparse 3D point set z
?
from MLS outliers ﬁltering, (d) the projected image on the reconstructed surface.
function approximation which consists of construction
of a bivariate polynomial ˜ g?R
3
of degree m (here we
take m=3) which locally minimizes the least-squares
error around q:
∑
p
i
(g(x
i
)? f
i
)
2
?(||p
i
?q||) (2)
That amounts to project r along the normal with
distance ˜ g(0) (local approximation of the surface at q).
C. Clustering-based Filtering
The clustering-based ﬁlter (CbF) permits to create a set
of n 3D control points, denoted by 3?n coordinate vector y
that guides the biomechanical model. Instead of constraining
the model directly using the forces generated from feature
displacements, the clustering calculates a displacement ﬁeld
more suitable to handle large deformations (see section IV
for more details).
First a set of control point is built by downsampling a set
z
?
of 3D points resulting from MLS step. Each control point
deﬁnes a region of interest to group the surrounded features.
The nearest features to the control point are assigned to
the cluster by combining the Hessian responses of the
SURFdetectorandtheShepard’sInverseDistanceWeighting
(IDW) following the formula D(p)=q
p∑
k
i=1
W
i
d
i
where D is
the weighted displacement of the control point p, k the total
number of neighbors and d
i
the displacement of the feature i.
Assuming the quality is isotropic at each feature, we deﬁne
a normalized measure of quality q
p
for each control point as
the average of the SURF Hessian responses of its neighbors.
W
i
is the weight assigned to each feature and is as follows:
W
i
=
(
R
c
?h
i
R
c
h
i
)
2
∑
k
j=1
(
R
c
?h
j
R
c
h
j
)
2
(3)
R
c
is the radius of the cluster in 3D space, h
i
the distance
of the feature from the control point and k the total number
of neighbors.
The Shepard’s IDW allows the nearby feature to the
control point to have the largest weight while the Hessian
response allows to prevent from poor measurement during
the tracking.
III. BIOMECHANICAL MODEL AND NON-RIGID
REGISTRATION
A. Biomechanical model
We employ a biomechanical model of liver composed of
parenchyma and vascular network which is an important
source of heterogeneity and anisotropy. From a mechanical
standpoint, the parenchyma model relies on a linear tetrahe-
dral ﬁnite element modeling using a co-rotational approach
[15]. This model is very well suited to handle large displace-
ments and has been proven to be relevant in the context of
real-time laparoscopic surgery [11]. The vascular system is
modeled with serially linked beam elements previously used
in modeling catheters and guide wires model proposed by
Duriez et al. [24]. Both models share very similar properties
which permit to build the composite model. A more detailed
description of both models and the coupling can be found in
[13]. Elastic forces are then deﬁned as in [15]:
f
i
(x)=R
e
K(R
?
e
x?x
0
) (4)
where K represents the stiffness matrix, R
e
the co-
rotational matrix and x,x
0
are vectors of size 3n representing
the position of the n degrees of freedom of the mechanical
model, respectively at any time t and time t=0. It is worth
mentioning that our framework was built using ﬂexible and
modular software design principles allowing to easily replace
the physics-based model.
B. Initial registration
The initial registration is an important step for AR sys-
tems. In this work this step is done manually through a
3D interface as in similar systems [4], [8], [5], [6], [12].
First, the biomechanical model is aligned on the ﬁrst pair
4123
Fig. 4. Selected frames of a superimposition of the biomechanical model onto the human liver during Minimally Invasive Surgery. Top: Heterogeneous
model including the parenchyma (white), the portal vein (red), the hepatic vein (blue) and a tumor (sphere). Bottom: A different visualisation of the
superimposition.
of laparoscopic stereo images. Then, only the reconstructed
points that reproject onto the model in the images are kept
to ﬁlter in points belonging to the liver.
C. Temporal non-rigid registration
We propose to handle the non-rigid registration by adding
external stretching forces introduced via tracking of 3D
control points. The tracked 3D control point set y represents
how visible parts of the liver are moving.
External forces are deﬁned by pairing the m 3D control
points y to the n degrees of freedom x of the bio-mechanical
model. At initialization (t = 0), the tracked points y
0
are
expressed in barycentric coordinates of the adjacent degrees
of freedom leading to the linear relation: y
0
=Jx
0
, where J is
a rectangular (3m,3n) matrix. We assume this linear relation
remains valid during the deformation.
At any later time t, the stretching forces induced by the
tracking are deﬁned as f
t
(y)=k(y?y
0
) where k can be seen
as the stiffness.
Finally, the stretching forces can be expressed with respect
of the degrees of freedom as
f
t
(x)=J
?
f
t
(y)= f
t
(x)=J
?
k·J(x?x
0
) (5)
the parameter k is set to be close to the Young’s modulus in
order to provide an equilibrium between the stretching forces
and the elastic forces (a higher value of k favors stretching
forces).
IV. EXPERIMENTATIONS AND RESULTS
In this section, we present the experimentations conducted
to validate our approach. The validation in context of MIS
is usually a challenging task. In our case, we propose
two validation protocols. The ﬁrst one is performed in the
context of in-vivo human liver surgery, the other involves
experimentsonex-vivoporcineliver.Inlattercase,theresults
are evaluated within a known ground truth. We also compare
our method CbF (tracking with Clusters-based Filtering)
with the related work DT (a direct tracking used in [13]).
A. Results on in vivo Human Liver
The purpose of conducting an in vivo experimentation
is to employ our technique in a real-life situation during
an abdominal hepatic surgery. Several important disturbing
factors are present: the illumination produced by the laparo-
scopic light, motion of instruments during the intervention
and motion of the organ induced by respiration and cardiac
cycle.
Fig. 5. Comparison between (right) our CbF tracking and (left) a the
DT method. Top: A top view showing the registration error that may occur
using a direct method. The biomechanical model (in white wireframe) is
locally constrained by a 3D feature in the case of a direct tracking while
it is constrained by set of features grouped around a control point. Middle
and Bottom: A front view showing the visual accuracy of our method. The
correct shape is well recovered even if the boundary (manually segmented
and represented here in yellow) is not correct everywhere.
For this study we used a heterogeneous biomechani-
cal model, that takes into account the hepatic and portal
vein to describe the liver soft-tissue behaviour, with the
following elastic parameters (according to [11]): Young’s
modulus of parenchyma E
p
= 7 kPa and Poisson’s ratio
? =0.45, Young’s modulus of vessel wall: E
v
=0.62 MPa
4124
and Poisson’s ratio ? = 0.45, thickness of the vessel wall:
t
V
=200 ?m. The parenchyma model was composed of 3391
linear tetrahedral elements and the vascular model of 120
beam elements. The augmentation is achieved in real-time
at around 25 fps. It’s worth mentioning that the real-time
achievement is directly related to the number of elements
(a larger number of elements will increase the computation
time).
Following [14], the parameters of the optical ﬂow consist
of 51?51 window and an interframe motion threshold of 20
pixels. The camera used is the Da Vinci Robot Endoscopic
Camera (Intuitive Surgical) with a baseline of about 6 mm,
acquiring image of 960?540 at 29.97 fps. On the set of 264
extracted features 26 control points are built when using a
radius R
c
=0.5mm.
Projection error (px)
Frame #60 #120 #180 #240
Clusters-based Filter 54.72 110.57 145.33 75.55
Tracking of [13] 809.95 659.04 304.78 766.01
TABLE I
A COMPARISON BETWEEN THE CLUSTERS-BASED APPROACH AND THE
DIRECT TRACKING.
The Figure 4 illustrates four selected frames of the aug-
mentation performed on a sequence of 812 frames showing
the long-term robustness of the tracking.
We can notice in the comparison illustrated in Figure 5
that the DT approach may fail to accurately register the
model onto the image, mainly because of noisy 3D features
that locally constraints the model. The table I summarizes
the projection errors of the mesh on the endoscopic images
(manually extracted contour) and shows that the CbF track-
ing permits to reduce considerably the error w.r.t the DT
approach.
B. Ex vivo quantitative validation on a porcine liver
The purpose of our tracking method is to estimate the
location of tumors that are not visible in the endoscopic
images. To validate such an approach we propose to perform
CT scans of the liver before and after a deformation while
acquiring the motion with a stereoscopic camera illustrated
in Figure 7. Using a wire attached to one lobe of a porcine
liver, we move the tissue in order to induce a deformation
which is captured with an endoscopic camera ensuring a CT-
scanning without producing artefact.
We introduce two artiﬁcial tumors in two different loca-
tions (cf Figure 6), near from the tension zone (tumor (a)
with an average size of 8mm) and far from the tension zone
(tumor (b) with an average size of 5mm).
In Figure 8 our CbF tracking is compared with the DT
approach using the data acquired during the manipulation
of ex-vivo liver. We measure the following quantities: The
tumor displacement due to the deformation for the Tumor
(a) is 88.6mm and Tumor (b) is 26.9mm. The measured
distance between the centers of mass of the ground truth
Fig. 6. Computed meshes form scanned porcine liver with the tumors (left)
and the corresponding endoscopic images (right).
and the tracked tumors is 5.13mm for the tumor (a) and
2.20mm for the tumor (b) when using the CbF tracking
and 39.04mm for the tumor (a) and 4.55mm for the tumor
(b) when using the DT approach.
It represents a signiﬁcant improvement over the DT
method and over current laparoscopic procedures where a
safety margin of 10mm to 25mm is usually considered
around the location of the tumor (planned on pre-operative
data) [23].
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 7. Experimental setup for the quantitative validation: (a) insertion of
an artiﬁcial tumor into one lobe of the liver, (b) a view of the the Da Vinci
Robot Camera capturing liver motion, (c) the wire hooked to the lobe is
pulled and maintained to perform a CT scan, (d) front view of the CT-scan
and the liver.
V. CONCLUSION
One of the current deadlocks to break before AR systems
can ﬁnd their place in the clinical routine of MIS procedures
is the ability to capture organs deformations during surgery.
Large and unpredictable liver deformation that occur during
surgeryhighlyimpactsthelocationofinternalstructuressuch
as tumors and vessels. We have presented in this paper, an
accurate tracking algorithm designed to constrain properly
a biomechanical model that is able to capture such defor-
mations. The model deformation is guided by both internal
4125
Fig. 8. A comparison study between the CbF, the DT approach and a
computer-generated force, on the tumor (a) and tumor (b). The clustering
reduces considerably the error between the predicted tumor and the ground
truth.
forces, generated by a biomechanically grounded model of
the liver, and external forces, that emanate from 3D control
points. These 3D control points are built form stereo images
through a clusters-based ﬁltering that restrict the noisy image
measurement. Such characteristics make our approach able
to accurately register the organ surface and inner the defor-
mation motion to the internal structures. Promising results
were obtained through in-vivo experimentation on a human
liver and ex-vivo validation on a porcine liver where errors
well below the current surgical margins and current methods
were measured. Future work will address the issue of initial-
isation that is currently done manually, and the robustness of
our approach against actual surgical events such as smoke,
bleeding, or sudden instrument occlusions that may hinder
the tracking. More validation is obviously required though it
is worth mentioning that validation implying actual organs
are seldom reported in previous works.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors highly acknowledge the help provided by
Mario Sanz Lopez during the experimentations and advisory
provided by Dr. Patrick Pessaux.
REFERENCES
[1] Nicolau S., Soler L., Mutter D., Marescaux J.: Augmented reality
in laparoscopic surgical oncology. Journal of Surgical Oncology; 20
(3):189-201
[2] Teber D., Guven S., Simpfendorfer T., Baumhauer M., Guven E. O.,
YencilekF.,GozenA.S.,RassweilerJ.:Augmentedreality:anewtool
to improve surgical accuracy during laparoscopic partial nephrectomy
Preliminary in vitro and in vivo results. Journal of European Urology
(2009).
[3] Su L.M. , Vagvolgyi B., Agarwal R., Reiley C. E., Taylor R.,
Hager G. D : Augmented Reality During Robot-assisted Laparoscopic
PartialNephrectomy:TowardReal-Time3D-CTtoStereoscopicVideo
Registration. Journal of Urology, 73(4):896-900, 2009.
[4] Puerto-Souza,G.A.andMariottini,G.L.:Anaugmented-realitysystem
for laparoscopic surgery robust to complete occlusions and fast camera
motions. In International Conference on Robotics and Automotion
2013.
[5] Figl M., Rueckert D., Hawkes D., Casula R., Hu M., Pedro O., Zhang
D. P., Penney G., Bello F., Edwards P.: Image guidance for robotic
minimally invasive coronary artery bypass. In Proceedings of the 4th
international workshop on Medical Imaging and Augmented Reality
(Berlin, Heidelberg, 2008), MIAR ’08, Springer-Verlag, pp. 202 209.
[6] Pratt P., Visentini Scarzanella M., Stoyanov D. and Yang G-Z.:
Dynamic Guidance for Robotic Surgery using Image-Constrained
Biomechanical Models. In Medical Image Computing and Computer
Assisted Interventions (MICCAI10), 2010.
[7] Jae-Hak Kim , Adrien Bartoli, Toby Collins and Richard Hart-
ley. Tracking by Detection for Interactive Image Augmentation
in Laparoscopy. In Workshop on Biomedical Image Registration,
WBIR’2012.
[8] Speidel S., Roehl S., Suwelack S., Dillmann R.: Intraoperative surface
reconstructionand biomechanical modeling for soft tissue registration.
In SCATh joint Workshop on New Technologies for Computer/Robot
Assisted Surgery, 2011.
[9] Shen T., Li H.; Huang X.: Active Volume Models for Medical Image
Segmentation. In IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging. 30 (3), 2011.
[10] Sermesant M., Forest C., Pennec X., Delingette H, Ayache N.:
Deformable biomechanical models: Application to 4D cardiac image
analysis. In Medical Image Analysis, 4 (7), 2003.
[11] Peterlik I., Duriez C., Cotin S.: Modeling and Real-Time Simulation
of a Vascularized Liver Tissue. In MICCAI 2012.
[12] Haouchine N., Dequidt J., Berger M.-O., and Cotin S. Deformation-
based Augmented Reality for Hepatic Surgery. In Medicine Meets
Virtual Reality, MMVR 20, San Diego, USA, 2013.
[13] Haouchine N., Dequidt J., Peterlik I., Kerien E., Berger M.-O., and
Cotin S. Image-guided Simulation of Heterogeneous Tissue Deforma-
tion for Augmented Reality during Hepatic Surgery. In International
Sympsium of Mixed and Augmented Reality (to appear), ISMAR’13,
Adelaide, Australia, 2013.
[14] Elhawary H., Popovic A.: Robust feature tracking on the beating heart
for a robotic-guided endoscope. Int J Med Robot. 2011 Dec;7(4):459-
68. doi: 10.1002/rcs.418. Epub 2011 Oct 7.
[15] M¨ uller M., Dorsey J., McMillan L., Jagnow R. and Cutler B.: Stable
real-time deformations. In ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium
on Computer Animation 2002.
[16] Levin, D. Mesh-independent surface interpolation. In ”Geometric
Modeling for Scientiﬁc Visualization” Edited by Brunnett, Hamann
and Mueller, Springer-Verlag, 2003, 37-49.
[17] L. Maier-Hein, P. Mountney, A. Bartoli, H. Elhawary, D. Elson, A.
Groch, A. Kolb, M. Rodrigues, J. Sorger, S. Speidel, D. Stoyanov,
Optical techniques for 3D surface reconstruction in computer-assisted
laparoscopic surgery, Medical Image Analysis, Volume 17, Issue 8,
December 2013, Pages 974-996, ISSN 1361-8415.
[18] Z. Zhang. A ﬂexible new technique for camera calibration. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., 22(11):13301334, Nov. 2000.
[19] D. Stoyanov. Stereoscopic scene ﬂow for robotic assisted minimally
invasive surgery. In Proceedings of the 15th international conference
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention,
MICCAI12, pages 479486. Springer-Verlag, 2012.
[20] X. Maurice, P. Graebling, and C. Doignon. Real-time structured light
coding for adaptive patterns. Journal of Real-Time Image Processing,
pages 110, 2011.
[21] R. Richa, A. P. L. B, and P. Poignet. Robust 3d visual tracking
for robotic-assisted cardiac interventions. In Proceedings of the 13th
international conference on Medical image computing and comput-
erassisted intervention, pages 267274. Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[22] Herrera, S.E.M.; Malti, A.; Morel, O.; Bartoli, A., ”Shape-from-
Polarization in laparoscopy,” Biomedical Imaging (ISBI), 2013 IEEE
10th International Symposium on , vol., no., pp.1412,1415, 7-11 April
2013 doi: 10.1109/ISBI.2013.6556798
[23] T.Mala,B.Edwin,I.Gladhaug,E.Fosse,O.Sreide,A.Bergan,andO.
Mathisen. A comparative study of the short-term outcome following
openandlaparoscopicliverresectionofcolorectalmetastases.Surgical
Endoscopy And Other Interventional Techniques, 16(7):10591063,
2002.
[24] C. Duriez, S. Cotin, J. Lenoir, and P. Neumann. New approaches to
catheter navigation for interventional radiology simulation. Computer
Aided Surgery, 2006.
4126
