Swarms of micro aerial vehicles stabilized under a visual relative
localization
Martin Saska, Member, IEEE, Jan Vakula, Libor Pˇ reuˇ cil, Member, IEEE
Abstract— A stabilization and control technique developed
for steering swarms of unmanned micro aerial vehicles is
proposed in this paper. The presented approach based on
a visual relative localization of swarm particles is designed
for utilization of multi-robot teams in real-world dynamic
environments. The core of the swarming behaviour is inspired
by Reynold’s BOID model proposed for 2D simulations of
schooling behaviour of ﬁsh. The idea of the simple BOID model,
with three simple rules: Separation, Alignment and Cohesion, is
extended for swarms of quadrotors in this paper. The proposed
solution integrates the swarming behaviour with the relative
localization and with a stabilization and control mechanism,
which respects fast dynamics of unmanned quadrotors.
The proposed method aspires to be an enabling technique
for deployment of swarms of micro areal vehicles outside
laboratories that are equipped with precise positioning sys-
tems. The swarming behaviour as well as the possibility of
swarm stabilization with the visual relative localization in the
control feedback are veriﬁed by simulations and partly by an
experiment with quadrotors in this paper.
I. INTRODUCTION
The possibility of deployment of large groups of un-
manned Micro Aerial Vehicles (MA Vs) closely cooperating
together brings new potentialities for autonomous robotics.
MA V swarms are beneﬁcial in numerous applications includ-
ing cooperative surveillance, reconnaissance and monitoring
tasks, search and rescue missions, searching for sources
of pollution, sensory data acquisition and various military
applications. To be more speciﬁc, swarms of MA Vs can be
employed for monitoring of natural disasters (ﬂoods, forest
ﬁres), patrolling of objects or protected areas (ammunition
depots, borders), surveillance of crowds (cultural and sport
events, demonstrations), monitoring of industrial accidents
(plume of toxic gas tracking, concentration of pollutants
measuring), sensing in large environments (measuring of
signal coverage, smog concentration) and many more.
Most of these tasks involve the utilization of swarms of
MA Vs in environments without any pre-installed infrastruc-
ture for precise localization of robots. Although available
global localization systems (such as GPS) can be used
for a rough positioning of the whole swarm, the precision
of these systems is insufﬁcient for relative localization of
closely operating MA Vs. Knowledge of the relative position
of neighbouring MA Vs in the swarm is crucial for collision
avoidance within the team and for any coordination of MA Vs,
The authors are with Department of Cybernetics, Fac-
ulty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical Univer-
sity in Prague, Technicka 2, 166 27 Prague 6, Czech
Republic fsaskam1,vakuljang@fel.cvut.cz,
preucil@labe.felk.cvut.cz
if it is required by the application (cooperative actions). The
swarm control approach presented in this paper is suited for
utilization of an onboard visual system for relative local-
ization in large teams of unmanned micro quadrotors. The
employed localization method provides precise information
on relative positions of neighbouring robots with an update
rate, which is sufﬁcient for the swarm stabilization.
Fig. 1. Swarm of quadrotors controlled by rules derived from behaviours
observed in schools of ﬁsh.
The presented algorithm designed for the swarm control
with obstacle avoidance ability is inspired by the Reynold’s
BOID model [1], which was developed to simulate schooling
behaviour of ﬁsh. In our method, the Reynold’s basic rules
(originally designed for control of 2D holonomic particles)
are interpreted for stabilisation of swarms of MA Vs under
the relative localization as follows:
 Separation - avoid crowding neighbours (a short range
repulsion to avoid collisions and to reduce mutual
airﬂow effects caused by propellers).
 Cohesion - keep swarm compact to enable its stabil-
isation using the relative localization (a long range
attraction to keep swarm particles in the range of the
visual localization).
The alignment is realized via a target attraction, which
steers swarm particles towards a common target. Besides, we
consider another rule, which is important in applications in
environment with obstacles or with possible human-swarm
interaction, where the swarm has to keep a sufﬁcient safe
distance from people:
 External avoidance - avoid obstacles (a short range
repulsion based on ﬂight direction).
In nature, ﬂocks (ﬁsh schools) can avoid obstacles or
escape from predators very fast in a cooperative way and
without mutual collisions. In analogy to the school of ﬁsh,
also MA Vs equipped with the onboard sensors for relative
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3570
localization are able to detect neighbours within a short
detection range and to determine their position and change
of the position. This information employed in the control
feedback enables the swarm to keep compact and avoid
obstacles without any explicit communication. Moreover,
even if not all robots of the group are able to detect the
particular obstacle, its avoidance is ensured via a sequential
transfer of motion changes through the swarm by continual
observing of relative positions of neighbours (the visual
relative localization system that we have introduced in [2]
is employed). The presented swarm stabilization approach is
an extension of work in [3], which was designed for control
of swarms of ground robots.
From the robotic point of view, such an approach based on
ﬂocking behaviour has two important advantages regarding
the large MA V swarms: 1) It is strictly decentralized based
only on the information gathered by onboard sensors and
therefore it is scalable. 2) The swarming rules are compu-
tationally efﬁcient and so the control algorithm can be run
in a fast loop even using the computational power available
onboard of simple MA Vs.
1) State of the art: Recently, the research of swarms of
autonomous vehicles covers broad areas of robotics including
aspects of task allocation and strategies for solving multiple
tasks [4], communication and maintenance of connectivity
within the team [5], a modeling of the swarm behavior
by predicting of individual behaviours [6], or a collision
avoidance within the swarm [7]. The topic involved in
this paper is related mainly to control and stabilization of
swarms of MA Vs [8], [9]. The most related to the research
proposed in this project is presented in [10], where swarming
behaviours of ground robots in a planar environment are
investigated. The aim of our approach is also to stabilize
swarms of autonomous robots (in our case MA Vs) in a
desired shape while maintaining a small distance among
themselves. Beyond the research presented in [10], we design
principles of swarming rules to satisfy requirements on the
visual system of relative localization in 3D, which enables to
take swarms of ﬂying robots outdoor. This is one of the most
important contributions of our method in comparison with
the aforementioned algorithms that have been veriﬁed usually
via numerical simulations or rarely using ground vehicles
in laboratories. In literature, one can ﬁnd also number of
works based on the Reynold’s model, e.g. [11], [12]. These
algorithms are also mostly designed to steer ground robots
or 3D particles, which are often considered as dimensionless
points. There is lack of approaches considering limitations
of MA V multi-robot systems or even investigating possibility
of deployment of swarms of aerial robots in real-world
missions.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENT AND PRELIMINARIES
Let us assume a group of N quadrotor MA Vs equipped
with omnidirectional vision system capable of relative lo-
calization of neighbouring robots and obstacles in a limited
range. The robots are identical to each other (the localization
does not provide the identiﬁcation of neighbours) and there is
no communication within the swarm available. The obstacles
are considered as a set of simple objects (spheres in the
experiments) with known relative positions from the MA Vs.
A complex map, could be represented by such objects with
arbitrary precision, but this paper is not focussed on the
environment representation/mapping.
The problem solved in this paper is to stabilize the robots
in a compact swarm in an environment with obstacles and,
if it is required by the application, to reach a target region.
In the case of the target following, we also assume that the
robots are able to detect the target position or a direction
into the target. The control algorithm must respect both the
relative positions of neighbouring MA Vs and the constraints
of the relative localization (local range). Clearance between
neighbouring MA Vs and between MA Vs and obstacles must
ensure a collision free movement.
A. Quadrocopter model and control
In this paper, we use a quadrotor vehicle model [13] with
four identical propellers located at vertices of a square (see
Fig. 2 b)). Each of the propellers j generate a thrust f
j
i
along its axis. For each MA V i, we consider an inertial
reference frame and a body-ﬁxed frame with origin located
at the center of mass of the MA V . The relative position of
these frames is deﬁned by the location of the center of mass
x
i
2 R
3
in the inertial frame and by the rotation matrix
R
i
2R
33
from the body-ﬁxed frame to the inertial frame.
The inertial reference frame is different for each MA V since
they cannot communicate with each other, which would be
necessary for uniﬁcation of the reference frames.
The motion model of MA Vs according to [13] is
_ x
i
=v
i
;
m
i
_ v
i
=m
i
ge f
i
R
i
e;
_
R
i
=R
i
^


i
;
J
i
_


i
+ 

i
J
i


i
=M
i
;
(1)
wherev
i
2R
3
is velocity of the center of mass in the inertial
frame, m
i
2 R is weight of the MA V , 

i
2 R
3
is angular
velocity in the body-ﬁxed frame, J
i
2 R
3
is inertia matrix
with respect to the body frame. The hat symbol ^ is deﬁned
by the condition ^ xy =xy for allx;y2R
3
,g is the gravity
acceleration and e = [0; 0; 1]. The total moment M
i
2 R
3
along all axes of the body-ﬁxed frame and the thrustf
i
2R
are control inputs of the plant. The total thrust, f
i
=
4
P
j=1
f
j
i
,
acts in the direction of the axis of the body-ﬁxed frame which
is orthogonal to the plane deﬁned by the centres of the four
propellers. The control inputs are obtained by the tracking
controller presented in [13], which is employed to reach the
new locations of MA Vs given by the swarming approach
described in section III.
B. Visual relative localization of swarm particles
The swarming principles investigated in this paper are
designed for using the light-weight vision based embedded
system of the relative localization of particles within the
3571
robotic group. The system developed within our team (see
[2] for technical details and performance analyses) is based
on a detection of black and white patterns with precision
in units of centimeters for distances in units of meters.
This operational range and precision are sufﬁcient for the
stabilization of groups of MA Vs cooperatively acting in close
swarms.
Although, this system is sufﬁciently robust and precise,
it has a drawback concerning stabilization of large groups
of MA Vs, since its operational range is limited (depends
on resolution of the employed cameras and size of the
pattern). Therefore, it is crucial to incorporate the operational
constraints into the swarming rules and to keep MA Vs in
appropriate relative positions regarding the relative localiza-
tion. The operational constraints are described by a model
of the localization arising from theoretical analyses of the
vision system and experimental evaluation of the system
performance in real scenarios presented in [2].
In addition, the localization system (in its simple version)
may not identify which MA V is recognized in robot’s neigh-
bourhood. The possibility of particular MA Vs identiﬁcation
would require more complicated patterns or patterns of
different colours, which would be at the cost of decreased
reliability, precision and operational range. The proposed na-
ture inspired swarm control technique is especially appealing
to deal with this limitation, since the swarm theory assumes
utilization of homogeneous particles. Therefore, also the rel-
ative interaction of swarm particles (described in Section III-
A) considers the neighbouring MA Vs as anonymous entities.
III. FLOCKING BEHAVIOUR WITH OBSTACLE AVOIDANCE
ABILITY
A novel MA V ﬂocking approach based on the Reynold’s
model of the coordinated animal motion is proposed in this
section. Taking the steering behaviours of Reynold’s boids
as an inspiration, we have incorporated the local interactive
forces from neighbouring robots into the dynamics of MA Vs.
We have also included effects given by proximate obstacles
and a force pushing the overall swarm into the desired
target region. This active force would not be necessary in
case of employment of the algorithm as a component of
higher level motion planning algorithms. Then the ﬂocking
MA V control can be used for swarm stabilization and for
emergency intervention due to its avoidance and escaping
behaviour, while the high level planner would solve the
swarm navigation.
The proposed swarming approach, which provides control
inputs based on surrounding quadrotors and near obstacles in
a decentralized manner, enables employment of large swarms
of relatively localized MA Vs. This control scheme provides a
sufﬁciently robust and fast solution, which requires minimal
computational power and simple sensors available onboard
of MA Vs. The swarming behaviour is designed as a com-
bination of the relative interactions of swarm particles, the
attraction of the target and the interaction with surrounding
environment as follows.
A. Relative interaction of swarm particles
The core of the proposed swarming behaviour is based
on the relative interaction between particles of the group.
The relative positions of neighbouring robots are composed
into the separate rules for each of the individuals indepen-
dently, which results in the required behaviour of the entire
group. This decentralized concept is suitable for the proposed
scheme, which is based on the relative visual localization of
MA Vs. In such a swarm, each robot is capable of localizing
only neighbours in its limited surroundings. The effects of
neighbouring robots are integrated into the MA V control by
the individual force
F
indi
=
N
X
j;j6=i
e
ij
F
indij
; (2)
where e
ij
is a distance weight function and F
indij
is an
interactive force.
The distance function emulates the sensor range of the
employed visual relative localization. It ensures that the
interactive force is considered in the MA V control rule only
if the neighbouring vehicles are in relative positions that
enable their conﬁdent localization. The distance function
is important mainly for realistic simulations of the MA V
swarm behaviour. In the experiments with real quadrotors,
this function is replaced by a tag indicating validity of
the sensory data. Such a tag is provided by the utilized
visual relative localization system [2]. The magnitude of the
distance weight function depends on the relative distanceL
ij
between two neighbouring quadrotors, i and j, as:
e
ij
=
1
e
aLij b
+c
+
1
e
0:5aLij b
+c
: (3)
The weight function is used with constant values a = 5,
b = 4, c = 0:6 in this paper. The interactive force
F
indij
=K
d
(kL
ij
k L
r
)L
ij
+D
d
dL
ij
dt
(4)
is designed as a spring-damper model. It enables stabilization
of the robots in a relative distance equal to a desired intra-
robot distanceL
r
. The constantL
r
has to be chosen smaller
than the range of the relative localization to ensure the
stabilization of the group. On the contrary, too small value
of L
r
can increase possibility of collisions and mutual
disturbances by air streams from propellers.L
ij
is a vector
between robotsi andj, which is given by the visual relative
localization. The constants, which are used asK
d
= 1:5 and
D
d
= 2 in experiments in this paper, affect the rate of the
convergence into the equilibrium. The required derivative of
the relative position of neighbours is obtained by Kalman
ﬁltering of the data from the relative localization system [2].
B. Swarm attractivity
The rule of the swarming behaviour presented in this
subsection deals with the attraction of the swarm to the target
position. This ability of the swarm movement into the desired
goal position is achieved by integration of an attractive force
3572
Fig. 2. a) Forces of interaction with surrounding environment. b) Integration
of the total swarming force into the MA V control.
to the MA V control scheme. The attractive force is pointing
at the goal and again it works as a spring-damper model:
F
goali
=K
g
L
ig
kL
ig
k
+D
g
dL
ig
dt
: (5)
Here, the required equilibrium that has to be achieved
is a zero relative distance between i-th robot and the goal
position. L
ig
is the relative position vector from the i-th
MA V to the goal. The constants, which are K
g
= 1:1 and
D
g
= 2 in experiments in this paper, control the rate of
convergence of the group. In comparison with the eq. (4),
where the force magnitude is changing based on the relative
distance to the neighbours, the attractive force is normalized
to ensure the same swarming behaviour along the whole
trajectory to the goal.
As it is well known in robotics, such a simple attractive
force suffers from local extremes in complex environments
with obstacles, which may result in undesirable oscillations
or a dead-lock. Nevertheless, this navigational approach is
sufﬁcient for the veriﬁcation of swarming principles based
on the relative visual localization, which is the main purpose
of this paper.
C. Interaction with environment
The obstacle avoidance behaviour is essential for the real-
world deployment of autonomous robots. Incorporation of an
obstacle avoidance function directly into the swarming rules
enables a very fast response to changing environment. In the
proposed approach, the avoidance manoeuvre is realized by
a translational reshaping of the swarm, which is caused by
the interactions between particles of the group. Thus some
individuals in the group may perform obstacle avoidance
even without sensing the obstacle directly. This results in
the required evasive action of the entire swarm without any
centralized command.
The arising reshaping of swarms of quadrotors caused by
detected obstacles is initialized by incorporating the equation
F
obsi
=
X
o2O
e
oi
H
oi
kH
oi
k
(6)
into the steering rules of each MA V . Each obstacle o in the
set of detected obstaclesO is considered in eq. (6). The
magnitude of F
obsi
depends on the direction dependence
function  and the exponential distance function e
oi
.
The function e
oi
, which is designed as
e
oi
=b
o
e
aokLoik
; (7)
is exponentially growing with decreasing distance kL
oi
k
between thei th MA V and the obstacle. The parameters of
the exponential function are used as a
o
= 3 and b
o
= 100
in experiments presented in this paper.
The direction dependency function ,
 = (1 + cos (	
io
)); (8)
is important due to the fast dynamics of the MA V swarms.
This function enables to generate a repulsion according to the
relative angle 	
io
between the vectorL
oi
and the direction
vector of the i-th MA V . L
oi
is the relative position vector
between the MA V and the obstacle. MA Vs ﬂying towards a
collision with the obstacle or in a direction which is close to
the collision are inﬂuenced by the avoidance function more
intensively.
H
oi
is vector perpendicular to the direction vector of thei-
th MA V , which is pointing away from the obstacle as shown
in Fig. 2 a). The vectorH
oi
is deﬁned as
H
oi
= (H
i
F
io
)H
i
; (9)
whereH
i
is the direction vector of the MA V . The forceF
io
is employed to keep the MA V in a sufﬁcient distance from
the obstacle. Also, it enables us to incorporate a prediction
of the obstacle movement into the avoidance function. The
force, which is deﬁned as
F
io
=K
o
L
oi
+D
o
dL
oi
dt
; (10)
deviates slightly from the vectorL
oi
oriented from the center
of the obstacle to center of the mass of the quadrotor, as
denoted in Fig. 2a. The deviation correlates with the move-
ment of the obstacle (included in the ﬁrst-order derivative of
L
oi
). Again, the constants, which are used as K
o
= 1:5 and
D
o
= 2 in experiments in this paper, inﬂuence speed of the
respond to detected dynamic or static obstacles.
The total force that acts on the i-th MA V is determined
as a sum of particular contributions as:
F
swarmi
=F
indi
+F
goali
+F
obsi
: (11)
For the stabilization of the quadrotor in the required
orientation, a ray from the center of mass of the MA V in the
direction of F
i
is employed as the reference for the single
MA V low-level control. The control approach addressed in
[13] is used to achieve the new orientation of the MA V in
the direction of F
i
. The low-level control is used to follow
the direction of F
i
until the update of the swarming rules
is initiated, based on the frequency of the high level control
loop of the swarm stabilization.
3573
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The experiments presented in this section have been de-
signed to show performance of the proposed method and
to analyse its key properties. The simulations shown in
Fig. 5 and 8 demonstrate the ability of the algorithm to
maintain a compact swarm of numerous MA Vs and to avoid
obstacles simultaneously. Movies of these simulations and
two additional experiments are available in [14]. In the
scenarios, 27 MA Vs (experiments 1 and 2) or 10 MA Vs
(experiments 3 and 4) are initialized in a compact formation.
At the beginning of the simulation, the quadrotors au-
tonomously increase their relative distances based on the
swarming rules described above. The desired equilibrium
is achieved very fast (in less then one second) as can be
seen in the graph of distances from quadrotors to their
closest neighbour shown in Fig. 4. Together with the swarm
stabilization, the group is moving towards the desired goal
position. After few steps of the ﬁrst simulation (Fig. 5), the
outer MA Vs of the swarm detect an obstacle. The obstacle is
positioned in the middle of the line connecting the start and
goal positions. The quadrotors smoothly avoid the obstacle to
keep the sufﬁcient distance from the detected object during
the whole manoeuvre. The distance between the obstacle and
all MA Vs is shown in Fig. 3. Once the obstacle is avoided,
the group converges back into the ﬂock shape, which is
depicted in the last snapshot of Fig. 5, and continues towards
the goal position. Reintegration of the sub-swarms is possible
only if there exists at least one relative interaction between
both groups. It means that the value of termke
ij
F
indij
k is
greater than zero for at least one pair of robotsi andj, which
belong to different sub-swarms.
Fig. 3. Graph of distances from MA Vs to the obstacle in the simulation
1.
The second simulation is initialized identically as the ﬁrst
one, but two additional obstacles are placed in the environ-
ment to show robustness of the approach. In snapshots of the
experiment in Fig. 8 and in the video in [14], one can see
that the swarm is again deformed due to the obstacles as the
“avoidance signal” is propagated through the group. During
the whole avoidance manoeuvre, sufﬁciently safe relative
distances within robots of the team as well as between robots
and all obstacles are kept. The values of distances between
the obstacles and MA Vs are plotted in Fig. 6 and the values
of distances between MA Vs and their closest neighbours in
Fig. 7.
Fig. 4. Graph of distances between MA Vs and their closest neighbour
during the simulation 1.
Fig. 5. Snapshots of simulation 1.
The experiments with multiple MA Vs show that the swarm
of quad-rotors can be stabilized using the visual relative
localization in the control feedback. In the experiment shown
in Fig. 9, two MikroKopters L4-ME and one AR-drone are
stabilized using only the feedback from onboard cameras.
Fig. 6. Graph of distances between MA Vs and the closest obstacle during
the simulation 2.
V. CONCLUSION
A nature inspired approach for control and stabilization
of swarms of unmanned micro aerial vehicles was presented
in this paper. The proposed method is designed with the
onboard visual relative localization of swarm members in-
tegrated into the MA Vs control. The algorithm is based on
simple swarming rules using an information on position of
neighbours in the team and obstacles in limited sensory range
without the necessity of communication. It was veriﬁed via
simulations that the proposed swarming principle, computed
onboard of MA Vs in a strictly decentralized manner, enables
3574
Fig. 7. Graph of distances between MA Vs and their closest neighbour
during the simulation 2.
Fig. 8. Snapshots of simulation 2.
Fig. 9. Veriﬁcation of the proposed swarm stabilization approach using
only the relative interaction between swarm members.
stabilization of the swarm of micro quadrotors. With these
desirable characteristics, the proposed approach could be an
enabling technique for employing large swarms of MA Vs
outside laboratories equipped with a precise global position
system. Such a swarming behaviour is appealing in scenar-
ios in which a large team of robots has to move closely
together: e.g. to form a distributed sensor for environment
measurement, monitoring or surveillance.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was of M. Saska supported by GA
ˇ
CR under M.
Saska’s postdoc grant no. P10312/P756 and L. Pˇ reuˇ cil was
supported by M
ˇ
SMT project Kontakt II no. LH11053.
REFERENCES
[1] C. W. Reynolds, “Flocks, herds, and schools: A distributed behavioral
model,” in Computer Graphics, 1987, pp. 25–34.
[2] J. Faigl, T. Krajn´ ık, J. Chudoba, L. Pˇ reuˇ cil, and M. Saska, “Low-cost
embedded system for relative localization in robotic swarms,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013.
[3] H. Min and Z. Wang, “Design and analysis of group escape behavior
for distributed autonomous mobile robots,” in 2011 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011.
[4] S. Berman, A. Halasz, M. Hsieh, and V . Kumar, “Optimized stochastic
policies for task allocation in swarms of robots,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 927 –937, 2009.
[5] T. Schmickl and K. Crailsheim, “Trophallaxis within a robotic swarm:
bio-inspired communication among robots in a swarm,” Autonomous
Robots, vol. 25, pp. 171–188, 2008.
[6] A. Winﬁeld, W. Liu, J. Nembrini, and A. Martinoli, “Modelling a
wireless connected swarm of mobile robots,” Swarm Intelligence,
vol. 2, pp. 241–266, 2008.
[7] M. Kumar, D. Garg, and V . Kumar, “Segregation of heterogeneous
units in a swarm of robotic agents,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 743 –748, 2010.
[8] D. J. Bennet and C. R. McInnes, “Veriﬁable control of a swarm of
unmanned aerial vehicles,” Journal of Aerospace Engineering, vol.
223, no. 7, pp. 939–953, 2009.
[9] L. Barnes, R. Garcia, M. Fields, and K. Valavanis, “Swarm formation
control utilizing ground and aerial unmanned systems,” in IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems., 2008.
[10] C. C. Cheah, S. P. Hou, and J. J. E. Slotine, “Region-based shape
control for a swarm of robots,” Automatica, vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 2406
– 2411, 2009.
[11] D. Gu and H. Hu, “Using fuzzy logic to design separation function in
ﬂocking algorithms,” Fuzzy Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 16,
no. 4, pp. 826–838, 2008.
[12] R. Olfati-Saber, “Flocking for multi-agent dynamic systems: algo-
rithms and theory,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 51,
no. 3, pp. 401–420, 2006.
[13] T. Lee, M. Leoky, and N. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking control
of a quadrotor uav on se(3),” in 49th IEEE Conference on Decision
and Control (CDC), 2010.
[14] Movie, “Movie of simulations of the swarming behaviour [online].
http://imr.felk.cvut.cz/swarm/ [cit. 2013-9-14],” 2013.
3575
