  
 
  
 
Figure 1.   iSplash-I: 1-Anterior actuation; 2-Midbody; 3-Thick peduncle; 
4-Transmission system; 5-Driven tail plate; 6-Tendons; 7-Compliant fin. 
 
  
 
Abstract—This paper presents a novel robotic fish, iSplash-I, 
with full-body coordination and high performance carangiform 
swimming motion. The proposed full-body length swimming 
motion coordinates anterior, mid-body and posterior 
displacements in an attempt to reduce the large kinematic 
errors in the existing free swimming robotic fish. It optimizes 
forces around the center of mass and initiates the starting 
moment of added mass upstream. A novel mechanical drive 
system was devised operating in the two swimming patterns. 
Experimental results show, that the proposed carangiform 
swimming motion approach has significantly outperformed the 
traditional posterior confined undulatory swimming pattern 
approach in terms of the speed measured in body lengths/ 
second, achieving a maximum velocity of 3.4BL/s and 
consistently generating a velocity of 2.8BL/s at 6.6Hz. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Underwater exploration is a physically demanding task. A 
robotic vehicle must navigate in an unpredictable surrounding 
environment which includes many disturbances and non-
uniformities due to the transient changes exerted from the 
liquid. These physical forces applied to the underwater vehicle 
(UV) can lead to inaccurate navigation and even failure of the 
operation as traditional propeller driven systems are unable to 
adapt to the dynamic environment. Some operational examples 
are military surveillance, mine countermeasure, inspection and 
pollution mapping. UV’s have particularly high cost of 
transport during low speed mobility [1]. This is where fish 
excel, generating large transient forces efficiently by 
coordinating their body motion [2],[3]. In addition, adversely 
the dynamic environment can be advantageous to fish 
locomotion, as they demonstrate the ability to extract energy 
from the upstream vortices [4]. Therefore there is great 
potential to improve UV’s by imitating the swimming fish 
with the highest locomotive performance operating within 
the desired environment and Reynolds numbers. Although 
there are still many aspects of locomotion to address, linear 
propulsion could be considered the greatest challenge.  
Most work in biomimetic underwater propulsion has 
focused on hydrodynamic mechanisms. Some examples of 
novel design approaches and their maximum speeds are 
Barrett’s hyper-redundant parameterized Robotuna which 
achieved a velocity of 0.65 body lengths/ second (BL/s) 
(0.7m/s) [5], Yu’s optimized discrete assembly prototype 
achieving a velocity of 0.8BL/s (0.32m/s) [6], Liu’s G9 
Carangiform swimmer achieving a velocity of 1.02BL/s 
(0.5m/s) [7] and Valdivia y Alvarado’s compliant structure 
Authors are with the School of Computer Science and Electronic 
Engineering, University of Essex, Colchester, CO4 3SQ, U.K.  (e-mail: 
r.j.c@ieee.org, hhu@essex.ac.uk ) URL: www.isplash-robotics.com 
assembly achieving a velocity of 1.1BL/s (0.32m/s) [8]. 
Currently the low speeds of robotic carangiform swimmers 
are unpractical for operation, peaking at speeds of 1Bl/s. In 
comparison, transient speeds of comparable live fish 
averaging at 10BL/s have been measured by Bainbridge [9].   
Reproducing the propulsive force of fish is a complex 
challenge. The development of a novel mechanism must take 
a number of factors into consideration, including 
morphological properties, weight distribution, efficient 
transmission principles, power density constraints and 
kinematic parameters. In particular accurately replicating the 
linear swimming motion has proven to be difficult and free 
swimming robotic fish have significant kinematic parameter 
errors. The lateral and thrust forces are not optimized and as 
a consequence excessive anterior destabilization in the yaw 
plane due to the concentration of posterior thrust creates 
reaction forces around the centre of mass. In turn the anterior 
creates posterior displacement errors. As a result the body 
wave motion along the full length of body has large matching 
errors in comparison to the swimming patterns of live fish 
leading to reduced performance and high cost of transport. 
This research project considered the factors contributing 
to the low hydrodynamic performance of current robotic fish 
within linear locomotion and proposed four main objectives: 
(i) Introduce a new swimming pattern to reduce the 
kinematic parameter errors by coordinating transverse 
displacements along the body length. (ii) Allow for efficient 
energy transfer by engineering a mechanism that takes into 
account hardware and material constraints so that propulsion 
is not restricted. (iii) Develop a prototype to improve 
stability in the vertical and specifically the horizontal plane, 
by optimizing the lateral and thrust forces around the center 
of mass. (iv) Validate the proposed swimming motion by 
realizing a mechanism capable of consistent free swimming 
operation, measuring its achievement in terms of speed, 
thrust, and energy consumption over a range of frequencies. 
iSplash-I: High Performance Swimming Motion of a Carangiform 
Robotic Fish with Full-Body Coordination 
Richard James Clapham and Huosheng Hu 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 322
  
 
   
Figure 2.   Mode 1:  Wave form is confined to the posterior 2/5. Parameters 
have been determined from experimental tests. 
      
   Figure 3.   Mode 2:  Full-body coordination. The kinematic parameters 
have been determined from experimental tests. 
 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II presents the traditional approach of robotic fish 
and introduces a new full-body length swimming motion 
approach. Section III describes the construction method of a 
novel robotic fish, iSplash-I. Section IV describes the field 
trials undertaken and the experimental results obtained. 
Concluding remarks and future work are given in Section V.   
II. DESIGN METHODOLOGY 
A. Traditional Approach  
Modeling from body and/or caudal fin (BCF) swimmers, 
the selected carangiform swimming mode can be identified 
by the wave length and amplitude envelope. The Cyprinus 
carpio (common carp) has been chosen specifically for its 
high locomotive performance [10].  
We only consider modeling within the confinements of the 
horizontal plane where the kinematics of propulsion are 
commonly reduced to the form of a traveling wave, 
concentrated to the posterior, varying in amplitude along the 
length, smoothly increasing towards the tail [2]. Present 
robotic swimmers adopted this method which limits 
undulatory motions, typically to <1/2 the body length 
towards the posterior and the wave form motion consists of 
one positive phase and one negative phase. The commonly 
adopted model proposed in [5], is in the form of: 
 
             
where y
body 
is the transverse displacement of the body;  is 
the displacement along the main axis starting from the nose 
of the robotic fish; k =2π/? is the wave number; ? is the body 
wave length; ? = 2πf is the body wave frequency; c
1 
is the 
linear wave amplitude envelope and c
2
 is the quadratic wave. 
The parameters P = {c
1
,c
2
,k,?} can be adjusted to achieve  
the desired posterior swimming pattern.  
B. Proposed Full-Body Swimming Motion 
Propulsion of carangiform swimming is associated with 
the method of added-mass [11]. Each propulsive segment of 
the travelling wave creates a force against the surrounding 
water generating momentum. This causes a reaction force F
R
 
from water onto the propulsive segment. F
R
 normal to the 
propulsive segment is decomposed into the lateral F
L
 
component which can lead to energy loss and anterior 
destabilization and the thrust F
T
 component providing 
propulsion increasing in magnitude towards the tail. The 
overall magnitude of added-mass passing downstream is 
approximately measured as the water mass accelerated and 
its acceleration. 
Therefore it is proposed that initiating the starting moment 
of added mass upstream and optimizing the F
L
 and F
T
 forces 
around the center of mass would increase the overall 
magnitude of thrust contributing to increased forward 
velocity. In consideration of this, we designed a novel 
robotic fish which can operate in two swimming patterns: (i) 
Applying a traditional rigid mid-body and anterior. 
Concentrating the undulations and degrees of freedom 
(DOF) to the posterior end of the body length which will be 
described as Mode 1, illustrated in Fig. 2; (ii) Based on 
intensive observation and fluid flow assumptions a new full-
body carangiform swimming pattern is introduced. The 
coordination of anterior, mid-body and posterior body 
motions are proposed in an attempt to reduce kinematic 
parameter errors, this will be described as Mode 2, 
illustrated in Fig. 3. 
The models midline and body motion parameters were 
first established based on observation and published data 
from literature providing an initial engineering reference. 
The wave form motion first developed for a discrete rigid 
anterior prototype in [7] can be extended to represent the full 
body motions of Mode 2 in the form: 
The relationships between the defined parameters P = 
{0.44,0,21.6,8} shown in Fig. 3 can first be found by 
evaluating the x location pivot at 0. In the kinematic pattern 
of Mode 2, the fraction of body length displaced is equal to 
the anguilliform swimming mode but reflects changes in the 
wave form. The anguilliform swim pattern is defined by 
large amplitude undulations propagating from nose to tail. 
The newly introduced Mode 2 applies an oscillatory motion 
to head and mid-body and pivots the entire body around a 
single point associated with the carangiform fish swimming 
motion [2]. 
Although this is the first account of applying full-body 
actuation to a research prototype fish, mechanisms such as 
“vortex peg” and “undulating pump” and flow visualization 
techniques have been proposed [12][13] from published 
biological studies, indicating a possible fluid body 
interaction that contributes to propulsive thrust is generated 
upstream to the posterior section. The muscle activity in the 
anterior has been measured to be low, suggesting that 
accurate modeling of the kinematics could be more 
significant than anterior force in improving energy transfer.  
As previously mentioned, anterior destabilization has been 
difficult to control [6][7][8], as passive rigid anterior 
( ) ( ) ( )
2
body 1 2 
           ,  sin k        (1)             y x t cx c x x t ? = ++
( ) ( ) ( ) ( )
2
body 1 2 1 
            ,  sin k sin      (2)                        y x t cx c x x t cx t ?? = + +?
323
  
  Figure 4.   Link approximation (top); 1-Plan; 2-Profile; 3-Front (bottom) 
 
 
 Figure 5.   Power transmission system: 1-Transision plate; 2-Crankshaft;  
3-Free end of link and connecting pivot. 
 
Figure 6.   Schematic drawing of the tail offset drive crank and linkage;  
 
mechanisms recoil around the center of mass. Free 
swimming robotic fish have excessive head swing, similar in 
magnitude to the posterior which increases drag. The 
proposed Mode 2 drives the anterior into the unwanted yaw 
direction, in an attempt to reduce amplitude errors by 
optimizing the F
R
 around the center of mass. It has also been 
noted in [2], that the morphological adaptations of reduced 
depth at the peduncle, increased depth of body towards the 
anterior and vertical compression minimize recoil forces.  
III. NEW CONSTRUCTION METHOD 
A. Mechanical Design 
Mechanical structure limitations set a great challenge 
when modeling the displacements within the travelling wave. 
Current methods typically adopt either a discrete assembly 
[6], [7] or compliant structure [8] but both are seen to have 
limitations. A construction method using structural 
compliance combined with a rigid discrete assembly is 
proposed. The arrangement distributes 3 degrees of freedom 
(DOF) and 1 passive DOF along the axial length shown in 
Fig. 4. Mode 1 disregards transverse displacements of links 
I, II, III whereas Mode 2 actuates all DOFs along the axial 
length to provide anterior and mid-body transversal 
displacements. The development allowed for both Modes of 
operation to be applied to the same prototype by adjusting 
the configuration. Uniform material properties were chosen 
for links I-III and stiffness distribution begins at DOF 3 and 
continues to the tail tip. To provide the undulatory motion a 
compliant caudal fin is attached to the link V and is actuated 
by tendons anchored to the main housing rear bulkhead. The 
developed mechanism allows for the expansion of the 
tendons and material stiffness of the caudal fin to be adjusted 
experimentally to provide the targeted curves during free 
swimming at various frequencies.  
The approximation of a traveling wave using joints I-V 
and turning angles of DOF 1-4 are shown in Fig. 4. Details 
of the fully discretized body wave fitting method are given in 
[6], [7]. The location of joints in the series can be 
determined by parameterized fitment to a spatial and time 
dependent body wave. The discrete construction method can 
be defined as a series of links or N links. N being the number 
of links after DOF 1 typically <6 due to structural 
limitations, more links reduce curve alignment errors. The 
aim of the design is to improve complexity of motion without 
an increase of structural parts. The link end points are shown 
in Fig. 4, it can be seen that the arrangement of DOF’s 
distributed along the length of the body provides an accurate 
curve alignment reducing large errors and excrescences in 
the outer profile. In addition we have observed that the 
aerofoil section NACA (12)520 based on camber, chord and 
thickness can be utilized to illustrate the outer structure 
profile of Mode 2 which we propose contributes to the fluid 
flow interaction. 
B. Power Transmission System  
The developed transmission system providing rotary 
power to linear oscillations is illustrated in Figs. 5 and 6. All 
actuated links are directly driven by the five bearing crank 
shaft providing an equal power distribution. The developed 
mechanical design required high-precision engineering of the 
chassis and crankshaft to avoid deadlock and reduce friction. 
The driven link amplitudes are determined by the offset 
cranks, L
3
 represents one of the discrete links of the 
structure. The maximum amplitude of the link length L
3
 at 
point P
2
 is determined by the predetermined maximum crank 
offset P
1
. The coordinates of P
1
 (P
1x
, P
1y
) and P
2
 (P
2x
, P
2y
) 
can be derived by: 
{ {
1 1 2 2 1 2
1 1 2 2 1 2
cos cos sin
sin sin sin
x xx
y y y
AB C P D
BC P D
PP
P P
?? ?
?? ?
= ++ = +
= + = +
    (3) 
The length of L
3 
can be derived by L
3
2
= P
2x
2
+P
2y
2
. Assume 
that ?
1
 is the angular velocity of the link L
3
, and the velocity 
vector V
P2
 is perpendicular to L
3
. We have: 
{
2 33
2 33
1
1
sin
cos
px
py
VL
VL
? ?
??
= ?
=
                             (4) 
where V
p2x
 and V
p2y
 are the decomposed vectors of the 
velocity vector V
P2
= ?
1
 L
3
. 
324
  
  
 
Figure 7.   Inner Structure of iSplash: 1-Mild steel space frame; 2-Mid-
body driven plate; 3-External source cables; 4-Polypropylene caudal fin; 5-
Aluminium main bulkhead; 6-electric motor; 7-Offset crank shaft; 
 
 
 Figure 8. Mode 2 during one body cycle, eight instances every 0.02s.  
C.   Fabrication  
iSplash-I shown in Fig. 7 was engineered as a 
morphological approximation of the common carp. The 
physical specifications are given in Table I. We devised a 
structurally robust prototype allowing for consistency of 
operation at high frequencies, as force has to be applied to 
the water and reactively, the opposing force is applied to the 
vehicle. All structural parts were precision engineered, hand 
fitted and assembled. A consideration of the development 
took hardware and material constraints into account, so that 
geometric and kinematic parameters are not affected. The 
hydro-static streamlined profile was optimized by favorably 
positioning the maximum thickness of the cross section, 
reducing pressure drag. In [10], the cross section has been 
measured to be optimal at 0.2 of the body length. These 
aspects relate to amount of resistance during forward motion 
and were taken into consideration within the design. 
Increasing endurance is a desirable feature of a UV. 
Current robotic fish are still limited to short operational 
times as energy losses can be produced in many stages of the 
mechanical transfer. Recent designs have found it is 
advantageous to utilize a single electrical motor for actuation 
[8]. The classical actuator is still the most effective way of 
providing power at high frequencies and reduces energy 
consumption over multilink discrete assemblies. Mass and 
volume distribution are key principles of stability in the 
horizontal and vertical planes. A single actuator power 
transmission system can be positioned in the optimum 
location. In contrast multilink servo assemblies are limited as 
mass and volume are confined to the posterior.  
The body has open loop stability if the relative position of 
buoyancy is higher than the center of mass as the 
surrounding fluid counterbalances the gravitational weight 
[14]. Therefore the hydrostatic buoyancy level and stability 
were solved by adjusting material properties and 
configuration. Stability was found to be particularly difficult 
to maintain during free swimming at high frequencies.  
Lastly, the inner structure of the prototype is negatively 
buoyant. A significant development of the prototype was a 
watertight skin that allowed unrestricted flexing of the 
external surface and provided the volume needed to maintain 
neutral buoyancy.  
TABLE I.  PHYSICAL PARAMETERS OF ISPLASH-I 
Parameter Specific Value 
Body Size: m 
Body Mass : Kg 
Maxium Velocity: BL/s (m/s) 
Noload Maximum Frequency: Hz 
Actuator 
Power Supply 
Fabrication 
Materials  
Swimming Mode 
Tail Material 
Outter Structure & Skin Material  
Thickness of Caudal Fin : mm 
Caudal Fin Aspect Ratio: AR 
 
0.25 x 0.05x 0.0 62  
0.367 
3.4 (0.88) 
8 
Single Electric motor  
12V Pb External Battery Supply  
Low Tolerance Engineering 
Aluminum, Mild Steel, Stainless 
Linear Locomotion  
Polypropylene  
Polystyrene an Polypropylene 
1 
1.73 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURE AND RESULTS 
A. Field Trials 
 A series of experiments were undertaken in order to verify 
the proposed swimming pattern by assessing the locomotive 
performance of Modes 1 and 2 in terms of speed, thrust and 
energy consumption at frequencies in the range of 2-8Hz. 
Experiments were conducted within a 1m long x 0.5m wide x 
0.25m deep test tank. Stabilized free swimming over a 
distance of 0.5m was used to measure speed with a 0.5m 
acceleration distance. The prototype had sufficient space to 
move without disturbances from side boundaries and the free 
surface. Measurements were averaged over many cycles 
once consistency of operation was achieved and steady state 
swimming was obtained. 
 Although the prototype was measured to have a higher 
mechanical efficiency with an oiled filled structure, the 
developed skin proved inconsistent. Therefore, all runs were 
completed actuating the prototype with a water filled 
325
  
 
 Figure 9.  Comparison of average electrical power consumption over 
driven frequency of both Modes, actuating in air and water. 
  
 
  Figure 10.  Comparison of average thrust in relationship to driven 
frequency achieved by both Modes.  
structure. This method attained consistency of operation 
providing stabilized swimming and maintaining the required 
buoyancy within the depth of the testing tank, whilst gently 
skimming the bottom surface. Velocity greatly reduced 
during runs when the skin detached, the build became 
negatively buoyant, destabilized or the cross-sectional area 
was increased. 
B. Swimming Pattern Observation 
Fig. 8 shows snapshots of Mode 2 in eight instances with 
time intervals of 0.02s throughout one body cycle. The 
midline was tracked at 50 frames per second to provide the 
amplitude envelopes of the anterior and posterior for 
comparison. Good agreement with fish kinematic data is a 
difficult task and current free swimming robotic fish have 
shown excessive head and tail amplitude errors. When 
comparing Modes 1 and 2, Mode 2 was found to reduce the 
head amplitude by over half from 0.17 (0.044m) of the body 
length in Mode 1 to 0.07 (0.018m). The tail amplitude of the 
common carp is 0.1 [9] [10], larger values were found to 
increase performance. Both Modes 1 and 2 were able to 
attain amplitudes of 0.17 (0.044m). The location of the 
midline pivot point should be in the range of 0.15-0.25 of the 
body length [10]. Mode 2 has a reduced error location of 
0.33 in comparison to 0.5 in Mode 1. Indicating Mode 2 
significantly reduces matching errors.  
In addition it was observed that the posterior 2/5 of the 
body length deforms due to stiffness distribution providing a 
smooth transition phase between body and tail. Although 
high aspect ratio (AR) caudal fins have been found to 
produce greater efficiency [4], in initial testing a low aspect 
ratio tail provided higher speeds. AR is calculated using: 
AR=b2/Sc where b squared is the fin span and Sc is the 
projected fin area. AR in this case was 1.73.  
TABLE II.  COMPARISON OF TEST RESULTS BETWEEN MODES 1 & 2 
Parameters Mode 1 Mode 2 
Reynold Number: Re (10
5
)  
Shrouhal Number: St 
Maxium Thrust: N 
Consistant Maxium Velocity: BL/s (m/s) 
Frequency: Hz 
Max Power Comsumption Air: W 
Max Power Comsumption Water: W 
Swimming Number: Sw 
Head Swing Amplitude: m 
Tail Swing Amplitude: m 
Test Run Distance: m 
1.4 
0.48 
0.63 
2.2 (0.55) 
6.1 
3.48 
5.76 
0.36 
0.044 
0.044 
0.5 
1.7 
0.41 
1.17 
2.8 (0.70) 
6.6 
3.76 
7.68 
0.42 
0.018 
0.044 
0.5 
C. Experimental Results 
Fig. 9 shows the average energy economy in relationship 
to driven frequency, comparing both Modes in air and water. 
This comparison measured the value of the increased 
resistance during locomotion due to the surrounding liquid. 
The measuring of the energy economy and thrust took many 
cycles to average, as the swimming motion produces 
fluctuating readings within a single body motion cycle. Both 
Modes actuating in water resulted in an increase in energy 
consumption, i.e. Mode 2 increasing from 3.76W to 7.68W 
and Mode 1 increasing from 3.48W to 5.76W.   
As the configurations of robotic fish show various 
hardware and morphological properties, the main value of 
comparison has become speed divided by body length 
(BL/s). In this case the body length is measured from nose 
tip to the most posterior extremity of the tail.  
The relationship between velocity and driven frequency is 
shown in Fig. 11. The corresponding values of Modes 1 and 
2 during consistent swimming were measured and compared 
to current robotic fish. Mode 1 achieved maximum velocity 
of 2.2Bl/s (0.55m/s), at 6.1Hz. Mode 2 increased maximum 
velocity to 2.8BL/s (0.70m/s) at 6.6Hz. Mode 2 has 
significantly increased performance in comparison with 
current robotic fish which typically peak around 1BL/s. An 
initial value of 3.4BL/s (0.87m/s) at 6.8Hz was recorded by 
Mode 2 with an oil filled structure. Sealing the developed 
skin when in contact with oil could not be maintained and 
skin detachment consistently affected stability and buoyancy, 
greatly reducing performance.   
We can notice that Mode 2 had an 85% increase of thrust 
(Fig. 10) and a 27% increase in velocity over Mode 1 whilst 
consuming only 7.68W of power at 2.8BL/s. As the power 
326
  
 
  Figure 11. Comparison of average velocities achieved by both Modes, 
contrasted against current robotic fish and the common carp. 
supply contributes to a significant portion of the total mass, 
high energy efficiency is important. The measured low 
energy consumption indicates that the next generation could 
carry its own power supply within a comparable geometric 
frame with good endurance.  
A prominent parameter for analyzing BCF locomotive 
performance is the Strouhal number (St), defined as St=fA/U, 
where f denotes the frequency, A denotes the tail amplitude 
and U is the average forward velocity. St is considered 
optimal within the range of 0.25 < St < 0.40.  Mode 1 has a 
peak St of 0.48 under the condition of Re = 1.4 x 10
5 
and 
Mode 2 consistently measured a St = 0.41 and peaked at a St 
= 0.34 under a condition of Re = 2.2 x 10
5
. A comparable 
live fish was measured in [3], to have a St  = 0.34, Re = 2~8 
x 10
5
. Applying Mode 2 shows a high performance increase 
within the St optimal range and achieves the higher cruising 
speeds of swimming fish. 
A significant relationship between velocity and driven 
frequency was found. As higher frequencies were applied 
velocity increased in both Modes, matching the reported 
findings of live fish [9]. From this it can be assumed that a 
further increase of frequency applied to this prototype may 
continue to increase its performance.  
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
  In this paper we show conclusively that by coordinating 
the full-body length of the carangiform swimming motion a 
significant increase in performance, in terms of linear 
swimming speed, is gained over the traditional posterior 
confined wave form. The innovative mechanical drive 
system increased maximum velocity over the current 
published robotic fish. In fact, the robotic prototype can 
continue to increase its velocity as increased frequencies 
were applied, indicating, that the high swimming speeds may 
continue to increase with an increase of frequency.   
The proposed swimming motion can coordinate anterior, 
mid-body and posterior displacements, and is able to reduce 
the large kinematic errors seen in existing free swimming 
robotic fish. iSplash-I achieved a maximum velocity of 
3.4BL/s and consistently achieved a velocity of 2.8BL/s at 
6.6Hz with a low energy consumption of 7.68W.   
  Future experimental analysis will greatly benefit from 
visualization techniques accurately measuring fluid flow. 
However, a few assumptions can be deduced to account for 
the increase in speed:  (i) The magnitude of propulsive force 
was increased by initiating the starting moment of added 
mass upstream; (ii) The developed structural arrangement 
allowed for smooth transition of flow along the length of 
body; (iii) Anterior and/or mid-body vortices were formed, 
coordinated and propagated downstream; (iv) Lateral and  
thrust forces were optimized around the center of mass; (v) A 
reduction in drag resistance due to reduced anterior 
amplitude errors.  
We also aim to improve the performance of iSplash-I by 
applying higher frequencies, further optimizing of kinematic 
parameters along the full length of the body and the 
development of a prototype carrying its own power supply 
within a comparable sized frame.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks go to Richard Clapham senior for his constant 
technical assistance towards the project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. R. Bandyopadhyay, “Maneuvering hydrodynamics of fish and 
small underwater vehicles,” Integr. Comparative Biol., vol. 42, no. 1, 
pp. 102– 17, 2002. 
[2] J. Lighthill, “Mathematical Bioﬂuiddynamics,” Society for Industrial 
and Applied Mathematics, Philadelphia, 1975. 
[3] J. J. Videler, “Fish Swimming,” Chapman and Hall, London, 1993. 
[4] G. S. Triantafyllou, M. S. Triantafyllou, and M. A. Grosenbauch, 
“Optimal thrust development in oscillating foils with application to 
fish propulsion,” J. Fluids Struct., vol. 7, pp. 205–224, 1993. 
[5] D. S. Barrett, M. S. Triantafyllou, D. K. P. Yue, M. A. Grosenbaugh, 
and M. J. Wolfgang, “Drag reduction in fish-like locomotion,” J. 
Fluid Mech, vol. 392, pp. 183–212, 1999. 
[6] J. Yu, M. Tan, S. Wang and E. Chen. “Development of a biomimetic 
robotic fish and its control algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Syst., Man 
Cybern. B, Cybern, 34(4): 1798-1810, 2004. 
[7] J. Liu and H. Hu, “Biological Inspiration: From Carangiform fish to 
multi-Joint robotic fish,” Journal of Bionic Engineering, vol. 7, pp. 
35–48, 2010. 
[8] P. Valdivia y Alvarado, and K. Youcef-Toumi, “Modeling and design 
methodology for an efﬁcient underwater propulsion system,” Proc. 
IASTED International conference on Robotics and Applications, 
Salzburg 2003. 
[9] R. Bainbridge, “The Speed Of Swimming Of Fish As Related To Size 
And To The Frequency And Amplitude Of The Tail Beat,” J Exp Biol 
35:109–133, 1957. 
[10] M. Nagai. “Thinking Fluid Dynamics with Dolphins,” Ohmsha, LTD, 
Japan, 1999. 
[11] P. W. Webb, “Form and function in fish swimming,” Sci. Amer., vol. 
251, pp.58–68, 1984. 
[12] M. W. Rosen, “Water flow about a swimming fish,” China Lake, CA, 
US Naval Ordnance Test Station TP 2298, p. 96, 1959. 
[13] M.J. Wolfgang, J.M. Anderson, M.A. Grosenbaugh, D.K. Yue and 
M.S. Triantafyllou, “Near-body flow dynamics in swimming fish,” 
September 1, J Exp Biol 202, 2303-2327, 1999. 
[14] G. V. Lauder and E. G. Drucker, “Morphology and Experimental 
Hydrodynamics of Fish Control Surfaces,” IEEE J. Oceanic Eng., 
Vol. 29, Pp. 556–571, July 2004. 
327
