Application of Magneto-Rheological Fluid Based Clutches for
Improved Performance in Haptic Interfaces
Nima Najmaei, Peyman Yadmellat, Mehrdad R. Kermani, Rajni V . Patel

Abstract— The two main objectives in designing a haptic in-
terface are stability and transparency. The dynamics of the
actuators employed in a haptic interface have a signiﬁcant effect
on these goals. In this article, the potential beneﬁts of Magneto-
Rheological Fluid (MRF) based actuators to the ﬁeld of haptics
are discussed. Devices developed with such ﬂuids are known
to possess superior mechanical characteristics over conven-
tional servo systems. This contributes signiﬁcantly to improved
stability and transparency of haptic devices. In this study,
this idea is evaluated from both theoretical and experimental
points of view. First, the properties of such actuators which
motivated this research are discussed. Next, two single degrees-
of-freedom (DOF) haptic interfaces are used in a virtual wall
experiment. These devices take advantage of an MRF-based
clutch and a brushless DC motor at their core, respectively. The
results of both devices are compared and show the superiority
of the MRF-based clutch. In addition, design and analysis
of a small-scale MRF-based clutch, suitable for a multi-DOF
haptic interface, is given and its torque capacity, inertia, and
mass are compared with those of conventional servo systems.
Conclusions drawn from this investigation indicate that MRF
clutch actuation approaches can indeed be developed to design
haptic interfaces with improved stability and transparency.
I. INTRODUCTION
Haptics studies the use of force and tactile feedback in order
to simulate the interaction with remote or virtual objects.
Such feedback allows the user to commit appropriate force
control actions through the haptic interface for safe and
proper manipulation. In this regard, haptic sensation should
be convincing enough to provide the user with a plausible
feeling of being directly in contact with the remote or virtual
environment. This desirable attribute is called transparency.
The stability of a haptic systems is another crucial issue in
designing such systems. However, it is known that trans-
parency and stability are conﬂicting design criteria [1].
The actuators and mechanisms used in designing a haptic
interface play an important role on the quality of force
feedback, as well as the stability of the system. This fact
makes the design of a haptic interface twofold challenging. In
order to have a transparent system, it is of utmost importance
that while a haptic device is capable of recreating the forces
All authors are with the Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Western University, London ON., Canada. R.V . Patel is also with the Dept.
of Surgery, Western University. In addition, N. Najmaei and R.V . Patel
are with Canadian Surgical Technologies & Advanced Robotics (CSTAR),
London ON., Canada. This work was supported by NSERC (Canada) under
grants RGPIN-346166 and RGPIN-1345, and by the Ontario Research
Fund Research Excellence Grant RE-05-049 (R.V . Patel). Financial support
for N. Najmaei was also provided by an NSERC CGS-D Scholarship,
an Ontario Graduate Scholarship, and an NSERC Collaborative Research
and Training Experience (CREATE) program grant on Computer-Assisted
Medical Interventions (CAMI).

Project Leader
that occur during contact with stiff objects, it exhibits low
friction, damping, and inertia in order to sustain transparency
during motion in free space. Poor dynamics and control of
manipulation can affect the sense of touch, in particular
when rigid instruments or actuators are used [2]. Heavy
and/or cumbersome haptic systems generate artifacts which
negatively affect the quality of the virtual presence [3]. Fur-
thermore, the use of active actuators (e.g., electrical motors)
in haptic devices may degrade the problem of stability [4]
due to generation of energy, the problem of reﬂected slave
forces, and induced master motion mechanisms, especially in
systems with time delay [5]. In addition, such actuators can
exhibit oscillations and jerks [6], which not only can cause
uncomfortable forces for the user, but are highly problematic
in delicate operations [7]. Most current haptic systems take
advantage of passivity-based and small-gain approaches in
order to guarantee the stability [8][9]. However, such ap-
proaches are considered to be conservative and in turn result
in degraded transparency. Hence, to effectively operate such
systems, long and costly amount of training is required.
Actuators based on Magneto-Rheological Fluid (MRF) have
been proposed as an alternative for use in haptic devices [2].
MRFs exhibit a very unique characteristic: the viscosity and
shear stress of these ﬂuids can be intelligently controlled
using an applied magnetic ﬁeld. Several passive and semi-
active actuators have been developed by taking advantage of
this feature. Such systems exhibit remarkable characteristics,
including high yield stress, low mass-torque and inertia-
torque ratios, compact size, intrinsic passivity, and precision
controllability [10]. It is expected that the superior char-
acteristics of MRF-based actuators in comparison to active
actuators will enable the design of a more transparent and
stable haptic interface. An investigation into this idea is
presented in this paper. An important contribution of this
paper is that it shows the effect of MRF-based actuators
in improving stability and transparency of haptic interfaces
from a practical point of view, by taking advantage of a large-
scale setup. Moreover, by providing the design and analysis
of a smaller scale MRF-based actuator, this study lays the
ground work for developing a multi-DOF haptic interface
that can be integrated in a surgical training environment. To
this end, ﬁrst, intrinsic properties of such actuators, which
have an impact on stability and transparency, are discussed
in Section II. Experimental evaluation on the performance
of a 1-DOF haptic interface which takes advantage of an
MRF-based clutch is presented in Section III. The well-
known virtual wall benchmark is used for this purpose and
the results are compared with another 1-DOF haptic device
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 832
with a DC motor at its core. Although the clutch used
in Section III is bulky, it serves as a proof of concept.
Conclusions drawn from these results indicate that indeed
the haptic interface with an MRF clutch exhibit improved
stability and transparency in comparison to its standard coun-
terpart. Furthermore, the design and analysis of a small-scale
MRF-based clutch is given in Section IV. The suitability
of the design is assessed by modeling the torque-mass, and
torque-inertia ratios, as well as output torque capacity. The
results show the promising potential of these actuators for
integration in a multi-DOF haptic interface with improved
stability and transparency.
II. ADVANTAGES OF MRF IN HAPTIC INTERFACES
This section studies the effect of MRF-based actuators on
the performance of haptic devices from a theoretical and
mechanical point of view.
MR Fluids are a suspension of micrometer-sized ferrous
particles in a carrier ﬂuid. When subjected to an externally
applied magnetic ﬁeld the particles form columns and align
themselves in the direction of the applied ﬁeld. Consequently,
the columns act to resist shearing or ﬂow of the ﬂuid.
The apparent yield stress of the ﬂuid is dependant on,
and increases with the intensity of the applied magnetic
ﬁeld. Using MRF, an actuation system can be constructed
such that the amount of transmitted torque/force can be
controlled by the intensity of an applied ﬁeld. The MRF
exhibit such behavior in three operational modes, namely
shear, ﬂow, and squeeze modes [11]. Various actuators have
been developed based on these operational modes, namely
dampers, brakes, and clutches. Overall, such actuators can
be used in order to design compact, light weight, low inertia,
low friction, high bandwidth, and high torque haptic devices
which can contribute to transparency. Several applications of
MRF-based actuators in force and tactile feedback devices
have been reported in the literature. These devices can be
roughly categorized into four types (a) force displays in the
forms of knobs, joysticks, parallel-link displays, etc. [6][12],
(b) tactile displays in the forms of pinch grasps, haptic
black boxes, etc. [2][13][14], (c) hand masters in the forms
of ground-mounted mouses, body-mounted gloves, and ex-
oskeletons [4][15], and (d) rehabilitation devices [16].
A haptic device should be capable of generating large
forces/torques in order to mimic interaction with stiff objects.
MR Fluids are capable of producing high shear stress. Such
shear stress is bounded and is limited to the physical prop-
erties of MRF, i.e., magnetic saturation [17]. Nevertheless,
MRF can produce high yield stresses typically in the range of
50 to 100 kPa, dependent on their chemistry. Hence, MRF
can be used to design actuators capable of transmission or
generation of high passive/semi-active force and torque.
While a haptic device should be able to generate high
torques, it is highly desirable that it exhibits low inertia.
Use of gear reduction for increasing the torque capacity
of electrical motors results in a signiﬁcant aggravation of
inertia. The reﬂected actuator inertia of a manipulator can
in fact be much larger than that of the link inertia, thereby
contributing a larger share of the inertial load [18]. On the
other hand, MRF-based actuators have the characteristic of
replacing the reﬂected rotor inertia of the motor with the
reﬂected inertia of the clutch output shaft [10]. It is shown
that MRF-based clutches demonstrate superior output inertia
characteristics over the low-inertia servo motors [12][17].
Heavy and cumbersome haptic interfaces affect the quality
of force feedback. It is highly desirable that a haptic device
has low mass-torque ratio. Light weight and compact size of
such actuators allow the user to experience a more plausible
interaction [19]. MR devices can be made substantially more
compact and lighter in comparison to electrical motors for
comparable performance [11]. In fact, such actuators exhibit
superior mass-torque ratio over the commercially available
servo motors [17].
High bandwidth of the actuation system is essential for trans-
parency of a haptic device. MRF respond to an applied ﬁeld
on the order of few milliseconds [17]. However, actuation
response becomes delayed due to ﬁeld propagation [20].
Nevertheless, MRF-based actuators are considered as high
bandwidth systems which can permit very high bandwidth
control, which is essential for mirroring fast motions [19].
The main problems with MRF-based devices is their non-
linear behavior and temperature dependency. MRF-based
actuators exhibits hysteresis due to the use of ferromagnetic
materials. This translates to a hysteresis relationship between
the input current and the output torque which leads to
tracking errors, unwanted harmonics, and undesired stick-
slip motions [21]. To develop accurate output torque to input
current relationships, it is important to both understand and
model the actuator hysteresis [21]. This is still an open
area of research. Another important issue is the temperature
dependency of MRF. These ﬂuids behavior change with a
variation in the device temperature. Hence, it is desirable to
integrate temperature sensors and include their output in the
modeling and control of the system.
III. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION:
HAPTIC RENDERING OF VIRTUAL WALL
In order to evaluate the effect of MRF-Based on the trans-
parency and stability of haptic devices, results of virtual
wall display obtained by experimentation on two single-DOF
haptic displays are presented and compared in this section.
The ﬁrst haptic interface consists of a prototype MRF-based
clutch (designed and constructed in our research group [17]).
The result of this system is then compared with that of a
haptic interface which takes advantage of an active actuators,
namely a brushless DC motor (Maxon EC-60).
Remark: It should be noted that the prototype clutch used in
this section, was initially designed for industrial applications
and it is not suitable for haptic application. Nevertheless, this
setup provides a good ground to study the beneﬁts that such
actuators can bring into haptic devices.
A. Experimental Setup
The experimental setup is shown in Fig. 1. The two consid-
ered single-DOF haptic devices are as follows;
833
MRF-Based Haptic Interface: This actuation mechanism
used an MRF-based clutch at its core [17]. Fig. 1(b) shows
the cross-section of a typical multi-disk MR clutch. The input
shaft breaks out into a set of input disks which are aligned in
parallel to a set of output disks attached to the output shaft.
MR ﬂuid ﬁlls the volume between input and output disks. A
driver motor applies a constant torque to the input shaft. By
energizing the electromagnetic coil, the viscosity of MRF,
and thus the compliancy of the clutch can be controlled.
In this setup, the input shaft of the clutch was driven by a
servo ampliﬁer which was set up in constant torque mode. A
handle was connected to the output shaft of the clutch and the
user could interact with the interface using this handle. An
ATI Gamma F/T sensor was placed on the handle in order
to measure the forces applied by and to the human hand.
Although this setup is only capable of generating forces in
one direction [17], it is suitable for our experiment since
all the forces experienced from the wall are in the same
direction. It should be noted that, the output torque of the
clutch is only controlled through regulating the magnetic
ﬁeld of the clutch. The Maxon motor had no role in output
torque control and it ran in constant torque mode in a single
direction. In order to control the output torque of the clutch,
ﬁrst the Hall sensor was used to measure magnetic ﬁeld
density in the clutch. Next, the Bingham Visco-Plastic (BVP)
model [21] was used to estimate the shear stress by using
magnetic ﬁeld ﬂux density. Having the shear stress, and
consequently the output torque, a PID controller generates
current as input of clutch to control output torque via
the National Instruments (NI USB-6229) multifunction I/O
device. The highest achievable control frequency using such
an I/O device was 500 Hz.
Motor
MR Clutch
Force
Sensor
Motor
Output
Flange
(a) (b)
Fig. 1. (a) Snapshot of the experimental setup. The mechanism takes
advantage of MRF-based clutches as part of the actuator. (b) Sectional view
of prototype MRF-based clutch
Electrical Motor-Based Haptic Interface: The setup in
Fig. 1 can also be used to study the performance of a motor
in a haptic device. The handle, connected to the output shaft
of the clutch, can be moved and connected to the output
ﬂange of Maxon EC-60 motor, while belt is disconnected
(Fig. 1). In this way, the motor can be used as a 1-DOF
haptic interface. The built-in PID controller in the EPOS
motion controller was used to control the output torque.
B. Results
Using the aforementioned setup, several experiments were
performed to compare the stability and transparency of MRF-
based clutches with electrical motors when implemented in
a 1-DOF haptic interface of virtual wall. The virtual wall
was implemented as a virtual torsional spring with stiffness
K
W
and a virtual rotational damper with damping coefﬁcient
B
W
. At the frequency of 500 Hz, interaction with a virtual
wall with different stiffness and damping was tested using
both setups. The user holds the handle and makes several
contacts with the virtual wall in each case.
First, a virtual wall with stiffness of K
W
= 10
Nm
rad
and
damping of B
W
= 10
Nms
rad
was considered. In this case,
due to the low stiffness, the wall exhibits high compliancy
and it deforms. Fig 2(a) presents the results of interacting
with the wall using the clutch and then the motor as haptic
device. These plots depict the torque applied by the wall
and the torque generated by the actuator. In addition, they
depict the position of the handle with respect to the wall
(the wall starts at 0deg). As can be seen, the clutch exhibits
much higher transparency when the user makes contact with
the wall. In fact, the root mean square (RMS) of the errors
between the torque of virtual wall and the torque felt by the
user hand are 0:119 Nm and 0:667 Nm for the clutch and
the DC motor, respectively.
(a) K
W
=10
Nm
rad
(b) K
W
=600
Nm
rad
0 5 10 15 20
-5
0
5
10
Torque [N.m]
Time [sec]
 
 
0 5 10 15 20
-60
-40
-20
0
20
Position [deg]
Time [sec]
Wall Torque
Clutch Torque
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
-5
0
5
10
15
Torque [N.m]
Time [sec]
 
 
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
Position [deg]
Time [sec]
Wall Torque
Clutch Torque
MRF-based clutch MRF-based clutch
0 5 10 15
-2
0
2
4
6
8
Torque [N.m]
Time [sec]
 
 
0 5 10 15
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
Position [deg]
Time [sec]
Wall Torque
Motor Torque
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
-50
0
50
100
Torque [N.m]
Time [sec]
 
 
0 1 2 3 4 5 6
-10
0
10
20
30
Position [deg]
Time [sec]
Wall Torque
Motor Torque
DC Motor DC Motor
Fig. 2. Results of interaction with the virtual wall at500Hz with damping
B
W
= 10
Nms
rad
and different stiffness for MRF-based clutch (top row)
and DC motor (bottom row). The virtual wall starts at 0 deg position.
The superiority of the MRF-based clutch becomes more
evident when the virtual wall becomes stiffer (i.e., K
W
=
600
Nm
rad
andB
W
= 10
Nms
rad
). The results of such interaction
are depicted in Fig. 2(b). In this case, the clutch exhibits a
few ripples in the output torque when contact is made with
the wall (0deg). However, these ripples are damped out after
a few cycles. The RMS error of the torque is 0:185Nm for
the clutch. As can be seen, the user is capable of making
834
0 2.5 5 7.5 10 12.5 15
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
1600
1800
Virtual Damping, B
W
Achievable Virtual Stifness, K
W
 
 
MR Clutch
DC Motor
Fig. 3. Maximum achievable virtual stiffness K
W
[
Nm
rad
] for different
virtual damping B
W
[
Nms
rad
] at 500 Hz for MR clutch and DC motor
several stable contacts with the wall. However, in the case
of the DC motor, the system becomes unstable as contact
is made, and the user loses control. This is evident in the
position of the handle in the bottom plot of Fig. 2(b). This
result shows better performance of the MRF-based clutch for
use in haptic devices. In fact, the clutch remains stable for
K
W
< 1700
Nm
rad
. A comparison between the transparency
of the two systems in the tests performed is given Table I.
TABLE I
TRANSPARENCY OF THE MRF-BASED CLUTCH AND DC MOTOR FOR
DIFFERENT STIFFNESS OF THE VIRTUAL WALL
K
W
[
Nm
rad
]
RMS of error in Torque Display [Nm]
MRF-based clutch DC Motor
200 0.105 0.803
400 0.137 0.940
600 0.185 Unstable
1000 0.185 Unstable
1700 Unstable Unstable
In another experiment, the maximum achievable stiffness
with each of the haptic interfaces were obtained for several
values of virtual damping B
W
. Fig. 3 presents the results.
The maximum achievable virtual stiffness in case of the
motor is limited due to constant physical damping. However,
in the case of MR clutch, higher Z-width is achieved. This
in fact shows the suitability and superiority of MRF-based
actuators for use in haptic devices.
IV. PRELIMINARY STUDY AND DESIGN OF A
SMALL-SCALE MRF-BASED CLUTCH
The promising results obtained in Section III motivated us to
move toward the design and manufacturing of a small-scale
version of an MRF-based actuator for application in a haptic
interface. This section provides the results of the preliminary
study and design of such an actuator. Manufacturing of the
proposed MR clutch in this section is currently underway.
The end goal of this project is to implement such actuators
into a multi-DOF haptic interface which will be integrated
in a surgical training environment (will be reported in the
near future).
A. Proposed Clutch Structure
Two major approaches in designing MRF-based clutches
have been identiﬁed in the literature, namely multiple disks
and drum-based designs [22]. The former has the same
structure as that of the prototype industrial MR clutch
in [17]. In drum-based design, the MRF is placed in the
gap between two concentric cylinders. By taking advantage
of a cylindrical coil inside the inner cylinder the shear stress
between the two surfaces can be controlled [23]. Modiﬁed
and hybrid versions of these two designs also exist [24].
The drum-based design is known to exhibit higher torque-
volume ratio [22]. On the other hand, they exhibit higher
friction and inertia as the size of the actuator increases [17].
Thus, the drum-based approach is a good candidate when a
compact and high-torque capacity actuator is desired. One
major drawback of such design is that the volume of MRF
energized by the magnetic ﬁeld is limited. Since the axis
of the coil is collinear to the axis of inner cylinder in this
design, the magnetic ﬁeld is applied to the MRF, only at the
two end of the coil. Hence the majority of the MRF gap is
not activated when operating. In this study, a new design –
called armature-based – is proposed in order to improve the
performance of the drum-based approach by increasing the
effective MRF volume.
The structure of the armature-based actuator is similar to that
of a DC motor, i.e., Figs. 4(a,b). In this design, MRF ﬁlls the
gap between a cylindrical casing and an armature, both made
out of ferromagnetic materials. The wire windings on the
armature creates magnetic ﬁeld perpendicular to the surface
of the MRF gap. Spacers, made of light and nonmagnetic
materials, ﬁll the armature stack slots in order to avoid drag
forces created by the ﬂuid accumulated between the armature
poles. A hall sensor will be ﬁxed on the top of one of the
poles to measure magnetic ﬁeld strength. As opposed to DC
motors, commutation is not required in this design since there
is no need for alternating poles. Numerical analysis of the
proposed design is given in Section IV-B.
Fig. 4(c) describes the operation of this actuator. A constant
input speed/torque is applied to the outer casing of the clutch,
e.g., using a motor. Then, through controlling the magnetic
ﬁeld, the output speed/torque is controlled and is applied to
the output link through cables/belts. It should be noted that
the clutch is only capable of providing unidirectional motion.
In section IV-C, the expansion of the proposed design into a
multi-DOF system is discussed.
B. Analysis and Comparison with Conventional DC Motors
In order to obtain the torque capacity of the proposed design,
ﬁrst ﬁnite element modeling (FEM) was used in order to
study the magnetic ﬁeld inside the actuator. This work took
advantage of FEMM Software [25] in order to perform the
FEM. Fig. 5 depicts the magnetic ﬁeld paths inside the
actuator. The armature-based design creates a uniform and
strong magnetic ﬁeld which improves the torque capacity.
Using the obtained FEM, the magnetic ﬁeld intensity H
at the MRF gap can be obtained. BVP model is used to
calculate the shear stress  at the gap,
 =
y
(H)+!r
MR
w
 1
MR
(1)
835
Sealing
Outer
Casing
Spacers
Armature
w. Windings
Hall
Sensor
Length <6cm
Diameter
< 4cm
(a)
Outer Casing
MRF
Hall Sensor
Armature
Input
Speed/Torque
Output
Speed/Torque
(b) (c)
Fig. 4. (a) Exploded and (b) cross-sectional view of the proposed small-
scale MRF-based clutch. (c) Description of the proposed clutch operation.
Wire
Windings
Outer
Casing
MRF
Armature
Fig. 5. Magnetic ﬁeld inside the system, obtained using FEMM [25].
where 
y
is the ﬁeld-dependent yield stress,  is the new-
tonian viscosity, ! is angular velocity between casing and
armature, and r
MR
and w
MR
are radius from armature shaft
and thickness of the MRF gap, respectively. Data relating
the yield stress 
y
of a ﬂuid are generally published by
the manufacturer and can be up to 50-100 KPa. The
viscosity  of the carrier ﬂuid is typically in the range of
0.1-0.3 Pa:s. Hence, in this study, we consider the torque
transmitted solely by the ﬁeld dependent yield stress of the
MRF. Calculating the value of
y
, the magnitude of generated
braking torque T will be obtained as,
T =N
p

y
A
MR
R
arm
(2)
where N
p
is the number of armature poles,
A
MR
= (2N
P
)
 1
R
arm
L
arm
is the area of MRF activated
at each pole, and L
arm
and R
arm
are the length and outer
radius of the armature, respectively. It can be seen in (2)
that the amount of torque a clutch can produce highly
depends on the strength of the magnetic ﬁeld created at
MRF gap. In order to create stronger magnetic ﬁeld, larger
numbers of wire windings turns and higher electrical current
are required. The number of wire turns and the wire gauge
(maximum safe current) is limited due to the available space
in armature stack slots, as well as, the limit on the mass and
inertia of the armature. On the other hand, the dimensions
of the armature poles and shaft can limit the ﬁeld created
due to magnetic saturation. If the smallest area A
min
of the
armature magnetic circuit is designed to be much smaller
than MRF gap area (A
min
 A
MR
), then that part can
become saturated (i.e.,

A
min


A
MR
, where  is magnetic
ﬂux), and in turn signiﬁcantly reduces the magnetic ﬁeld at
the MRF gap.
As mentioned above, the effective inertia of the armature
and the weight of the clutch are also important factors with
regard to transparency of a haptic interface. The effective
inertia of the armature J
arm
is,
J
arm
=J
shf
+N
p
J
p
+J
w
(3)
where J
shf
, J
p
, and J
w
are the moments of inertia of the
armature shaft, pole, and wire winding, respectively. Next,
the weight of the clutch M
cl
can be obtained as,
M
cl
=
st
(V
shf
+N
p
V
p
+V
cs
)+
MR
V
MR
+M
w
(4)
where 
st
and 
MR
are density of steel and MRF, respec-
tively, V
shf
, V
p
, V
cs
, V
MR
are the volume of the armature
shaft, pole, outer case, and MRF gap, respectively, and M
w
is the mass of wire windings. Derivation of these values are
not included in this paper for the sake of brevity.
In order to assess the suitability of the proposed design,
a comparison with Maxon the EC-max DC motors [26]
is performed. This series of motors includes some of the
most powerful and versatile small-scale DC motors. To
perform the comparison, the armature-based MR clutches
with the exact dimensions of the Maxon motors and six
poles (N
p
= 6) are considered. Then, their torque capacity,
reﬂected inertia, and weight are compared. Table II presents
the torque capacity of the motor and the clutch with similar
dimensions. The results show the superiority of the clutch in
comparison to the Maxon motors.
TABLE II
COMPARISON BETWEEN TORQUE CAPACITY OF MAXON EC-MAX AND
MR CLUTCH WITH SAME DIMENSIONS (TORQUES [mNm])
Note: ECXX YYW = EC-MAX XX, YY WATT
Motor Model EC40 120W
EC40 70W
EC30 60W
EC30 40W
EC22 25W
EC22 12W
EC16 8W
Diameter [cm] 4 4 3 3 2.2 2.2 1.6
Length [cm] 8 5.5 6 4 4.5 3 3
Nominal Torque 168 94 63 34 23. 10.9 8.2
Stall Torque 2090 636 519 160 127 35.5 22
Same-Dimension
3610 2830 1890 1190 497 330 68
Clutch Torque
Next the mass and effective inertia are compared. Fig. 6
presents a comparison of the inertia-torque and mass-torque
ratios. MR clutches exhibit lower ratios, which demonstrates
its suitability for use in a haptic interface. One should note
that in order to have a fair comparison between the inertia
of the actuators, the reﬂected inertia of the DC motors
is calculated as J
eq
= G
2
r
J
rot
, where J
rot
is the rotor
inertia of the DC motor [26]. G
r
is the gear ratio required
836
to create output motor torque comparable to that of the
clutch, i.e., T
eq
= G
r
T
stall
. The stall torques (and not
the nominal torques) of the motors are considered in these
results. However, this is not considered in comparison of the
actuators mass.
0 1 2 3 4
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Torque [Nm]
Effective Inertia [gr.cm
2
]
 
 
MR Clutch
Maxon EC-Max
0 1 2 3 4
0
200
400
600
800
Torque [Nm]
Mass [gr]
 
 
MR Clutch
Maxon EC-Max
(a) (b)
Fig. 6. (a) Inertia to torque (with gear reduction) and (b) mass to torque
(without gear reduction) relationships for Maxon EC-max and MR clutch
C. Implementation in a Multi-DOF system (Future Work)
The use of MRF-based clutches in a multi-DOF haptic
device can be addressed using the concept of Pluralized
Antagonistic Distributed Active Semi-Active actuation [10].
In this conﬁguration multiple MR clutches can be driven
by a single motor, which is located at the base. The single
motor applies a constant unidirectional speed/torque to all
sets of clutches, also through a system of cables and pulleys.
A set of two clutches are employed to apply torques to
each joint through cables and pulleys [10]. The two MR
clutches antagonistically provide opposite directions with
respect to each other at the joint. By taking advantage of the
small-scale MRF-based clutches in such a conﬁguration, a
lightweight and compact multi-DOF haptic interface is under
development for a surgical training environment.
V. CONCLUDING REMARKS
MRF–based actuators exhibit promising characteristics for
applications in haptic devices. Low output inertia, low mass-
torque ratio, superior performance and bandwidth, precision
controllability of output torque, and intrinsic passivity of
MRF-based actuators are important characteristics for hap-
tic interfaces. The results of the virtual wall experiment
conducted in this paper on a large-scale prototype of an
MRF-based clutch support these claims and demonstrate
the desirable performance of such actuators when used
in a haptic device. This provides a strong motivation for
developing small-scale MRF-based actuators as a lightweight
and compact actuating systems. Speciﬁcally, such actuators
are well suited for haptic devices which are required to
provide high-torque capacity, while having better stability
and transparency. Our preliminary studies on the small-scale
armature-based clutch supported this claim.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Lawrence, “Stability and transparency in bilateral teleoperation,”
Robotics and Automation, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 9, pp. 624 –
637, Oct 1993.
[2] A. Bicchi, M. Raugi, R. Rizzo, and N. Sgambelluri, “Analysis
and design of an electromagnetic system for the characterization of
Magneto-Rheological ﬂuids for haptic interfaces,” IEEE Transactions
on Magnetics, vol. 41, pp. 1876 – 1879, May 2005.
[3] R. Rizzo, N. Sgambelluri, E. Scilingo, M. Raugi, and A. Bicchi,
“Electromagnetic modeling and design of haptic interface prototypes
based on magnetorheological ﬂuids,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics,
vol. 43, pp. 3586 –3600, sept. 2007.
[4] Y . Nam, M. Park, and R. Yamane, “Smart Glove: Hand master using
magneto-rheological ﬂuid actuators,” in Proceedings of SPIE, 2007.
[5] K. Kuchenbecker and G. Niemeyer, “Induced master motion in force-
reﬂecting teleoperation,” Journal of Dynamic Systems, Measurement,
and Control, vol. 128, no. 4, pp. 800–810, 2006.
[6] D. Senkal and H. Gurocak, “Haptic joystick with hybrid actuator
using air muscles and spherical MR-brake,” Mechatronics, vol. 21-
6, pp. 951–60, 2011.
[7] M. Reed and W. Book, “Modeling and control of an improved
dissipative passive haptic display,” in IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation, vol. 1, pp. 311 – 318 V ol.1, 26 2004.
[8] R. Lozano, N. Chopra, and M. Spong, “Passivation of force reﬂecting
bilateral teleoperators with time varying delay,” Mechatronics, vol. 12,
pp. 215–223, 2002.
[9] I. Polushina, X. Liu, and C. Lung, “Stability of bilateral teleoperators
with generalized projection-based force reﬂection algorithms,” Auto-
matica, vol. 48-6, pp. 1005–1016, 2012.
[10] A. Shafer and M. Kermani, “On the feasibility and suitability of MR
ﬂuid clutches in human-friendly manipulators,” IEEE/ASME Transac-
tions on Mechatronics, vol. 16-6, pp. 1073 – 82, 2010.
[11] P. Rankin, J. Ginder, and D. Klingenverg, “Electro- and magneto-
rheology,” Current opinion in colloid & interface science, vol. 3,
pp. 373–381, 1998.
[12] F. Ahmadkhanlou, G. Washington, and S. Bechtel, “Modeling and con-
trol of single and two degree of freedom Magneto-Rheological ﬂuid-
based haptic systems for telerobotic surgery,” Journal of Intelligent
Material Systems and Structures, vol. 20, pp. 1171–86, 2009.
[13] N. Sgambelluri, R. Rizzo, E. Scilingo, M. Raugi, and A. Bicchi,
“Free hand haptic interfaces based on magnetorheological ﬂuids,”
in Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual Environment and
Teleoperator Systems, 2006.
[14] R. Rizzo, “A permanent-magnet exciter for magneto-rheological ﬂuid-
based haptic interfaces,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 49,
no. 4, pp. 1390–1401, 2013.
[15] K. Kim, Y . Nam, R. Yamane, and M. Park, “Smart Mouse: 5-DOF
haptic hand master using magneto-rheological ﬂuid actuators,” Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 149, pp. 1–6, 2009.
[16] B. Weinberg, J. Nikitczuk, S. Patel, B. Patritti, C. Mavroidis, P. Bonato,
and P. Canavan, “Design, control and human testing of an Active Knee
rehabilitation Orthotic device,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, pp. 4126 –4133, 10-14 2007.
[17] A. Shafer and M. Kermani, “Design and validation of a MR clutch
for practical control applications in human-friendly manipulation,” in
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2011.
[18] M. Zinn, B. Roth, O. Khatib, and J. Salisbury, “A new actuation
approach for human friendly robot,” The international journal of
robotics research, vol. 23-4, p. 379, 2004.
[19] Y . Bar-Cohen, C. Mavroidis, M. Bouzit, B. Dolgin, D. Harm, and
W. R. Kopchok, G.E., “Virtual reality robotic telesurgery simulations
using MEMICA haptic system,” in SPIE Smart Structures Conf., 2001.
[20] N. Takesue, J. Furusho, and K. Kiyota, “Fast response MR-ﬂuid
actuator,” Journal of Society of Mechanical Engineering, vol. 47,
pp. 783–791, 2004.
[21] P. Yadmellat and M. Kermani, “Adaptive modeling of a fully hysteretic
Magneto-Rheological clutch,” in IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2012.
[22] P. Nguyen and B. Choi, “Selection of magnetorheological brake types
via optimal design considering maximum torque and constrained
volume,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 21-1, pp. 1–12, 2012.
[23] P. Nguyen and B. Choi, “Accurate torque control of a bi-directional
magneto-rheological actuator considering hysteresis and friction ef-
fects,” Smart Materials and Structures, vol. 22-5, pp. 1–12, 2013.
[24] M. Avraam, MR-ﬂuid brake design and application to a portable
rehabilitation device. PhD thesis, Univ Libre de Bruxelles, 2009.
[25] D. Meeker, “Finite Element Method Magnetics Software, Version
4.0.1, http://www.femm.info/.” 2006.
[26] Maxon Motor, High Precision Drives and Systems, 2013.
837
