AdaptiveAssist-As-NeededControllertoImproveGaitSymmetry
inRobot-AssistedGaitTraining
Damiano Zanotto, Paul Stegall, Sunil K. Agrawal

,
Robotics and Rehabilitation (ROAR) Laboratory, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027
fdz2265, prs2136, sunil.agrawalg@columbia.edu

Corresponding Author
Abstract—This paper introduces the overall design of
ALEX III, the third generation of Active Leg Exoskeletons
developed by our group. ALEX III is the ﬁrst treadmill-based
rehabilitation robot featuring 12 actively controlled degrees of
freedom (DOF): 4 at the pelvis and 4 at each leg. As a ﬁrst
applicationofthedevice,wepresentanadaptivecontrolleraimed
to improve gait symmetry in hemiparetic subjects. The controller
continuouslymodulatestheassistiveforceappliedtotheimpaired
leg, based on the outputs of kernel-based non-linear ﬁlters, which
learn the movements of the healthy leg. To test the effectiveness
of the controller, we induced asymmetry in the gait of three
young healthy subjects adding ankle weights (2.3kg). Results on
kinematic data showed that gait symmetry was recovered when
the controller was active.
I. INTRODUCTION
Stroke often results in a combination of cognitive, sensory
and motor impairments [1]. The most common movement
impairment following stroke is hemiparesis, a condition that
encompasses weakness and reduced motor function on one
side of the body, and may involve facial muscles as well as
the upper and lower extremities [2], [3].
Affected subjects may experience difﬁculties in performing
basic activities of daily living, such as eating, dressing, han-
dling objects, etc. Even though stroke survivors are usually
ambulatory [4], their walking capacity is limited and requires
repetitive task-speciﬁc training [5] and intense physiotherapy
[6] for recovery. Typical features of impaired gait function
are reduced walking speed, endurance, joints ranges of mo-
tion, and spatial and temporal symmetry. Gait asymmetry, in
particular, is thought to be mainly correlated to the degree
of spasticity of the affected ankle plantarﬂexors [7]. Several
symmetry ratios might be utilized to quantify gait asymmetry
[8]. Post-stroke subjects, for instance, might show step-length
ratios (affected limb over unaffected limb) of approximately
1:13, and single-support ratios ranging from 0:53 to 0:66 [7].
The rationale behind robot-aided gait rehabilitation is that
robotic devices have the potential to reduce the physical
burden on the therapists and the costs of treatments, as well as
to increase the duration and frequency of the training sessions,
while allowing for continuous, quantitative assessment of the
level of motor function recovery [9]. However, after more than
ten years since early robotic gait trainers were ﬁrst proposed
[10], there is still no consensus about the superiority of this
technology compared to traditional forms of physiotherapy
[11]. The lack of clear results further challenge the robotics
community to develop novel design solutions and control
strategies that better support motor re-learning [12], [9].
Early robot trainers actively controlled hip and knee joint
motions only. This approach, however, may induce compen-
satory strategies on the subjects rather than helping them
develop a normal gait [13]. Indeed, the pelvis and the ankle
play a key role in walking: the former facilitates swing and
load shifting between legs [14], [15], the latter contribute to
trunk support, forward progression and swing initiation [16].
This paper deals with ALEX III, the ﬁrst treadmill-based
bilateral exoskeleton capable of applying controlled forces
to the pelvis, hip, knee and ankle joints at the same time.
The device is the third prototype of Active Leg Exoskeleton
(ALEX) developed by our research group [17], [18], and
was designed to actively control 4-DOF at each leg (hip
adduction/abduction, hip and knee ﬂexion/extension, ankle
plantar/dorsiﬂexion), as well as 4-DOF at the pelvis (ver-
tical rotation, anterior/posterior, superior/inferior and lateral
motions). These new features involved major design changes
compared to previous versions of ALEX, which were unilat-
eral devices, with hip and knee ﬂexion/extension as the only
active DOFs (pelvic motion was provided passively, ALEX II
having the same pelvic DOFs as those of ALEX III, and
ALEX I lacking anterior/posterior translation).
The focus of this paper is twofold: We ﬁrst introduce the
overall design of ALEX III, including the 4-DOF platform,
and then illustrate a ﬁrst application of the robot, where an
adaptive controller is implemented to facilitate recovery of
gait symmetry in impaired subjects. The controller integrates
our previous implementation of the assist-as-needed paradigm
(AAN), which consisted of a static non-linear force tunnel
built around the target footpath [17], with novel adaptive
capabilities provided by a pool of kernel-based nonlinear
ﬁlters. These ﬁlters are synchronized to the phase of the gait,
as estimated by adaptive frequency oscillators (AFO) [19],
and they continuously modulate the force-ﬁeld acting on the
impaired leg by learning the trajectory of the healthy leg.
The use of adaptive frequency oscillators in combination
with non-linear ﬁlters was ﬁrst proposed in [20] in the context
of supervised learning of periodic trajectories for humanoid
robots. Only recently, however, AFO-based controllers have
been applied to gait exoskeletons to reduce muscle effort
in the wearer [21], [22] and to improve transparency [23].
Here, we explore a novel application of this tool to an
adaptive AAN controller aimed to facilitate recovery of gait
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 724
Fig. 1: Subject walking in ALEX III with weights attached to
his left distal shank.
symmetry. Feasibility of our approach is validated by means
of experimental tests on a small group of healthy subjects.
II. ALEX III DESIGN
ALEX III is a bilateral exoskeleton, featuring a 4-DOF
platform and two 4-DOF legs. Its design was conceptualized
starting from two key-concepts: ﬂexibility and transparency.
With ﬂexibility, we mean the possibility to test a wide set
of training strategies (e.g., constrain some DOFs while pro-
viding variable assistive/perturbing forces to others). This was
addressed by actively controlling those DOF that are most
important in walking, and by appropriately choosing the size
of the motors, such that the range of torques the robot can
apply at a certain joint approximately matches the equivalent
torques provided by human muscles around the same joint.
To improve transparency, the mechanical impedance of the
leg was minimized by mounting the actuators on the support
platform, and by using a combination of rigid parallelogram
linkages and loops of timing belts to remotely apply forces
to the human lower limbs. As a consequence, most of the
mechanical components are located behind the wearer’s legs,
so that the subject can freely swing his/her arms while walking
(Fig. 1). In the following, we provide details on the design of
the support platform, while a detailed description of the leg
can be found in [24].
The vertical and anterior/posterior motions of the support
platform are enabled by four legs. The rear legs consist of a
parallel linkage, with Cardan universal joints at the top and
the bottom (Fig. 2). Due to the nature of the parallel linkages,
each rear leg is equivalent to a virtual leg that runs parallel
to the rear leg and passes through the top of the front leg.
The top of the each leg is independently capable of reaching
a spherical shell. By connecting the top of the front and virtual
legs together - as it is done on the left and right sides of the
platform - the reachable space is restricted to the intersection
Prismatic
Universal
Revolute
Virtual Leg
Axis of Rotation
Common Circle
Fig. 2: Kinematic diagram of the support system.
of the front and virtual legs’ shells, i.e. a commoncircle. The
latterliesintheradicalplaneofthetwospheres,withitscenter
lying on the axis that connects the bases of the two legs (axis
of rotation in Fig. 2), and its radius being the height of the
triangle formed by the same axis and the two legs.
Theleftandrightsidesoftheplatformareconnectedtoeach
otherwithrails.Iftheradicalplanesofbothsidesarethesame,
then the structure would behave like a four bar linkage in that
plane. However, by moving the front prismatic joints closer
together, distinct radical planes are created, thereby ﬁxing
the structure for any given position of the lower prismatic
joints.ThesystemcanthenbemodeledasaPRRRPkinematic
chain composed of the projection of the spatial chain onto the
sagittal plane. Moving all the lower prismatic joints forward or
backwards creates anterior and posterior motion, respectively.
Increasing or decreasing the distance between the front and
rear bases produces inferior and superior motion, respectively.
On the rails connecting the left and right side of the platform
rides a prismatic joint that produces lateral motion of the
pelvis. This also carries a revolute joint providing rotation
about the vertical axis. The exoskeletal legs and the wearer’s
belt are attached after this joint.
An alternative design solution would be to use two planar
PRRRP kinematic chains, as proposed in [25], [26]. However,
universal joints have a signiﬁcant advantage. The moment arm
created by the length of the support legs is substantial: if the
joints were a single revolute joint, any lateral loading at the
top of the support system would result in an extremely large
moment at the base of each support leg. Conversely, by using
universal joints, the ends of the support legs only see moments
about the longitudinal axis of the leg, so they act mainly
in compression. This allows for the use of smaller compo-
nents, reducing mass and moment of inertia. The support legs
725
Fig. 3: Left leg control scheme
themselves are angled inward to help take lateral loading and
increase stability.
III. ADAPTIVE AAN CONTROLLER
The low level controller of ALEX III is similar for the
legs and the support platform. It consists of force feedback
loops with gravity and friction compensation terms (Fig. 3,
right side). Instead of controlling the actuators torque output
(traditional torque control), we control the interaction error
by closing the loop on force-torque sensors mounted between
each robot orthosis and the user’s body (directforcecontrol).
This approach was tested on an earlier version of ALEX [27]
and proved to be effective in canceling out a signiﬁcant frac-
tion of the undesired interaction forces arising from the inertia
of the robotic links, without the use of inertial compensators.
ThissectiondealswithanadaptiveAANcontrolleraimedto
facilitate recovery of gait symmetry. It integrates our previous
implementation of the AAN paradigm (i.e., a static non-linear
force tunnel built around the target footpath [17]), with novel
adaptive capabilities provided by the combined use of adaptive
oscillators and kernel-based nonlinear ﬁlters. The AFO is
responsible to extract the phase of the gait, whereas non-linear
ﬁlters learn the trajectories of the hip and knee joints of the
unimpaired leg as a function of the phase. These are then
utilized to continuously update a reference footpath, which
shape the behavior of the assistive force ﬁeld acting on the
contralateral leg (Fig. 3, left side).
The joint angle trajectory (t) during walking can be
approximated by a periodic non-sinusoidal signal, whose fre-
quency spectrum comprises only multiples of a fundamental
frequency. A suitable estimator
^
(t) can therefore be written
as the sum of M oscillators [21]:
^
(t) = 0 +
∑
M
1
ai sin(?i (t)); (1)
where the i-th oscillator tracks the i-th harmonic component,
similarly to a real-time Fourier decomposition. We further
assume that the phase of the fundamental harmonic, namely
?
1
(t), yields a good estimate of the gait phase. The set of
equations governing how the pool of oscillators learns the
frequency of the teaching signal F (t) =(t) 
^
(t) is given
by [21]:
_ ?i (t) = i ! +" F (t) cos(?i (t)); i = 1; ::;M
_ !(t) = " F (t) cos(?1 (t));
_ ai (t) =  F (t) sin(?i (t)); i = 1; ::;M
_
0 (t) =  F (t);
(2)
where ?
i
, (i!) are the phase and frequency of the i-th
oscillator, and ",  are the coupling strength and the learning
factor of the AFO.
Subsequently, based on the estimate ?
1
(t), N equally
spaced kernel functions in the form 	
i
(?
1
(t)) =
exp
[
h
(
cos
(
?
1
(t) 
2i
N
)
 1
)]
are used to reconstruct the
signal (t):
~
(t) =
∑
N
1
	
i
(?
1
(t))w
i
(t)
∑
N
1
w
i
(?
1
(t))
(3)
Here,
~
(t) is the reconstructed signal and h deﬁnes the width
of the kernel functions. Incremental learning of weights w
i
is
achieved at each time sample n through a RLS method with
forgetting factor  [20]:
wi (n+1) = wi (n)+	i (n) Pi (n+1)er (n) ;
er (n) = [(n) wi (n)];
Pi (n+1) =
1

(
Pi (n) 
Pi(n)
2

	
i
(?
1
(n))
+Pi (n)
)
(4)
This algorithm runs in parallel for the hip and knee ﬂex-
ion/extension angles of the unimpaired leg - as measured by
the encoders embedded in the robot - yielding the estimates
~

HIP
(t) and
~

KNEE
(t). The parameter  controls how quickly
theseestimatesadapttovariationsoftheuser’sgait.If=1,the
same relative importance is given to recent and older data, and
therefore the algorithm adapts slowly. Conversely, when<1,
more importance is given to recent data, and the estimates
adapt quickly.
Let 
REF
(?) be the target footpath for the impaired leg:
REF (?) = (x(?);y(?)); ?2 [0;2); (5)
then the most recent angle estimates, together with the infor-
mation on the current phase, can be used to locally update the
target footpath:
REF (?(t)) = f
(
~
HIP (t);
~
KNEE (t)
)
(6)
where f is the (forward kinematics) function mapping sub-
ject’s hip and knee angles to the position of his/her foot in
the sagittal plane. In (6), ?(t) can be equivalently chosen
as ?
1;HIP
(t) or ?
1;KNEE
(t). The assistive force to be exerted
on the wearer’s impaired foot depends on the position of the
latter relative to 
REF
. The force-ﬁeld behavior is modeled by
a nonlinear virtual spring that exerts a normal force towards
726
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
?60
?50
?40
?30
?20
?10
0
10
20
30
time [s]
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12
0
360
?
HIP
, ?
HIP
, ?
KNEE
, ?
KNEE
 [deg]
?
1,HIP
 [deg]
? ?
Fig. 4: Hip (red) and knee (green) angles of the right leg,
as measured by encoders (dashed) and estimated by the non-
linear ﬁlters (solid). Blue vertical lines and gray line indicate
heel strikes and the phase estimate ?
1,HIP
respectively.
the prescribed footpath if the deviation of the subject’s foot
from 
REF
exceeds an adjustable threshold:
F =
{
kN(d D0)
2
n if (d > D0);
0n otherwise;
(7)
wherek
N
is the stiffness of the virtual spring,D
0
is the width
of the force tunnel, d is the distance of the subject’s foot from

REF
andnistheunitvectordirectedalongthelineconnecting
the subject’s ankle point to the closest point of 
REF
. F is
ﬁnally mapped to the vector of equivalent interaction torques

des
which is fed to the low-level controller (Fig. 3).
In the ALEX III controller, AFO, non linear ﬁlters and
footpath update run at 500Hz, whereas the force-ﬁeld con-
troller run at 1kHz. Preliminary tests showed that M = 6
oscillators with  = 0:5 and " = 12 reach synchronization
in about 3 steps. N = 90 was found to be a good tradeoff
between accuracy of estimation and computational load, and
the width of kernel functions was set to h = 2:5N. The
forgetting factor  = 0:995 was chosen experimentally to
guarantee smooth adaptation of the reference footpath. Fig. 4
shows how ?
1,HIP
(t) and the estimates
~

HIP
(t) and
~

KNEE
(t)
evolved with time, after the AFO was activated, at t = 2:7s,
while a subject was walking in ALEX III at 0:9m/s. The AFO
progressively synchronizes to the gait cycle and the nonlinear
ﬁlters (anchored to the phase estimate) rapidly learn the input
signals, such that estimation errors become negligible after 5
steps. Fig. 5 shows how the target footpath adapted as the
treadmill speed was reduced from 1.0 to 0.5m/s.
Onemightarguethatasimplerwayofassistinggaitsymme-
try would be to directly feed the trajectory of the unimpaired
foot to reshape the force ﬁeld. However, this approach might
jeopardize gait stability in case of variations of the gait pattern
induced, for instance, by changes of walking cadence. Indeed,
theupdateofthereferencetemplatewouldbenecessarilydone
all at once at discrete gait events (e.g., at initial contact of one
foot). Conversely, with the approach proposed above the target
footpath adapts smoothly to changes in frequency and shape:
0
10
20
30
40
?0.3
?0.2
?0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
?0.86
?0.84
?0.82
?0.8
?0.78
?0.76
x [mm]
step count
y [mm]
Fig. 5: Change in the reference footpath as the treadmill speed
is reduced from 1:0 to 0:5m/s between steps 26 and 27.
the online estimation of the gait phase by means of the AFO
allows for continuous update of the reference trajectory, while
theactionofnon-linearﬁlterswithforgettingfactorsmoothens
thetransitionsingaitfootpath,thuspreventingabruptchanges.
The user is never constrained to follow a ﬁxed trajectory and
assistive forces are nil if his/her foot is sufﬁciently close to
the reference footpath.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
A. Protocol and data analysis
Three healthy male adults (age 29  5 years, height
1:770:03m, weight 70:32:1kg) from our research group
volunteered for this experiment, designed as an initial proof
of concept validation of ALEX III and the adaptive AAN con-
troller. To approximately mimic the asymmetric limb move-
ment patterns associated with hemiparetic locomotion, we
applied additional weight (2:3kg) to subject’s left distal shank,
and regarded the left leg as the “impaired” one. Location
and magnitude of the load were chosen such as to alter
gait kinematics signiﬁcantly [28]. A 5-minute familiarization
session was included prior to the experiment to let participants
get used to walking in the exoskeleton. Afterwards, subjects
walked in the robot under four different conditions, each one
lasting 2 minutes, while the treadmill speed was set to 0:9m/s.
In this experiment, pelvis rotation and lateral motion were
locked in the robot, and the human ankle was not interfaced
to the exoskeleton, to allow ﬁtting of the ankle weight.
Theﬁrstsession(baseline)includedtreadmillwalkingwhile
the robot was controlled in zero-interactionmode: the desired
interaction torques reﬂected at the hip and knee joints of
each leg were set to zero (i.e., 
des
= 0N in Fig. 3), as
were the desired interaction forces at the pelvic brace. This
session was used to assess the subject’s level of gait symmetry
at baseline. In the following session (weight), the task was
similar except for the addition of the ankle weight. Healthy
individuals require approximately 50 strides to reach steady-
state joint patterns after the addition of external weights. The
deadaptation process is usually slower, and can take up to
70 strides [28]. To guarantee a complete wash-out before
testing the controller, we included a deadaptation session
that resembled the baseline. The last session (force ﬁeld)
727
involved testing the effects of the adaptive force ﬁeld on the
subject walking with the weights. Besides haptic guidance,
in this session participants were also given augmented visual
feedback on the target footpath and on the current position of
their foot.
Data collected by the robot in the last 60 seconds of
each session were sampled at 500Hz and processed. Stride-
to-stride subdivision was achieved by means of footswitches.
In the following, we present results from two representative
symmetry metrics, the normalized error area (NEA) and the
double-support ratio (DS ratio), which address spatial and
temporal asymmetry, respectively. The former was deﬁned
as the deviation area between two successive left and right
footpaths, divided by the area of the reference footpath (right
leg footpath). t-tests were run on each subject separately, to
check for signiﬁcant differences in the two metrics across the
4 sessions ( = 0:05). Bonferroni’s correction was utilized to
control the familywise error rate.
B. Results
1) Spatial symmetry: Fig. 6a shows that for all the subjects,
the addition of the ankle weight signiﬁcantly increased the
deviation area between the left and right footpaths compared
to baseline (p < 0:001). This result is in line with previous
ﬁndings [28], [29], suggesting that loads < 2kg attached to
the lower extremities can alter gait kinematics signiﬁcantly.
The baseline value was successfully recovered during deadap-
tiation.
All three subjects were able to improve gait symmetry
when walking with the adaptive controller, with the deviation
area being signiﬁcantly smaller than in the weight session
(p < 0:001). An interesting result is that the deviation area
was actually smaller than in the baseline session for all the
subjects(p< 0:001).Thismightbeduetothecombinedeffect
of haptic guidance and visual feedback, the latter favoring
accurate volitional control of the foot trajectory.
In general, these results suggest that the locomotor control
systemofhealthysubjectscantakeadvantageoftheassistance
providedbytheadaptiveforceﬁeldtosuccessfullycompensate
for the disturbance caused by ankle weighting and recover a
more symmetrical gait pattern.
2) Temporalsymmetry: Thedoublesupportratioistheratio
between double support of the right leg and that of left leg.
During double support, the weight is progressively transferred
to either the left leg (right DS) or to the right leg (left DS).
A DS ratio less than unity, then, indicates decreased time
available to shift the load to the left leg. This change was
signiﬁcant in all three subjects, when comparing the weight
session to baseline (p < 0:001, Fig. 6b). A known effect of
asymmetric weighting is increased swing time in weighted
limb due to the extra mass [30]. This was reﬂected in all
subjects by a decrease in the ratio of the stance periods of
right and left legs (not reported here for the sake of brevity).
A prolonged swing period in the left leg, in turn, would delay
the initial contact of the left foot, thus reducing the right DS.
During the deadaptation session, this deviation was recovered
s
subject 1 subject 2 subject 3
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
0.35
0.4
Footpath Error
0.45
+
+
+
+
+
*
+
+
+
+
*
*
+
+
+
+
0.19
0.22
0.29
0.35
0.21
0.11
0.42
0.18
0.13
0.35
0.24
0.16
(a) Error area between the left and right footpath, nor-
malized to the area of the right footpath (NEA).
subjectn1 subject 2 subject 3
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
Double Support Ratio
baseline
weight
deadaptation
forcenfield
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
*
*
p<0.05
+ p<0.001
0.73
1.14
1.13
0.91
0.83
0.88
0.88
1.07
0.89
1.14
0.86
1.20 (b) DS ratio (Right/Left) for each subject.
Fig. 6: Experimental results
by all subjects (p > 0:05). The adaptive force ﬁeld helped
subject 1 and 2 recover temporal symmetry, their DS ratio
in session forceﬁeld being not signiﬁcantly different from the
baseline value. This was not the case of subject 3 (p = 0:004),
whose DS ratio during the last session was actually close to
the non-assisted weighted condition (p> 0:05).
In summary, the force-ﬁeld proved to be more effective in
restoring spatial symmetry than temporal symmetry, at least
for one subject. A possible explanation is that the force ﬁeld
prescribed a target footpath rather than a target trajectory, thus
allowing subjects to adjust the actual timing of movement.
Yet, spatial and temporal variables were linked by the
constraint on the walking speed (imposed by the treadmill),
and this would explain the beneﬁcial effects on temporal
symmetry detected in subject 1 and 2.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the overall design of ALEX III and a
ﬁrstapplicationoftheroboticplatform,motivatedbyasymme-
728
tries typical of hemiparetic gait. The controller continuously
modulates the force ﬁeld applied to the impaired leg based
on the outputs of kernel-based non-linear ﬁlters that learn the
movements of the unimpaired leg, and can thereby smoothly
accommodatechangesingaitpatternandtiming,suchasthose
derived from modifying the walking speed.
Experimental results showed that the controller was effec-
tive in helping 3 healthy subjects improve gait symmetry, after
their gait pattern was temporarily altered by ankle weighs.
Spatial symmetry was recovered more easily than temporal
symmetry. It should be noted that our results - though promis-
ing - are only preliminary, and further tests need to be run on
a larger sample size before drawing any general conclusion
on the effectiveness of the controller on healthy subjects.
Indeed, the controller improved subjects’ spatial symmetry
even beyond the baseline values: given the AAN nature of
the force controller, we speculate that this effect was due
to the visual feedback (active during the force ﬁeld session)
favoringaccuratevolitionalcontrolofthefoottrajectory,rather
than to the robot assistance. A modiﬁed experimental protocol
including a session with haptic guidance only and one with
visual guidance only would help conﬁrm this hypothesis.
Finally, whether or not similar positive results would trans-
fer to hemiparetic subjects is still an open question that can
only be answered with future tests on clinical population.
VI. AKNOWLEDGMENT
ThisworkwassupportedbytheNationalInstituteofHealth,
Grant No. HD 38582.
REFERENCES
[1] P.M.Kelly-Hayesetal.,“Theamericanheartassociationstrokeoutcome
classiﬁcation,” Stroke, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1274–1280, 1998.
[2] C. Richards, F. Malouin, and C. Dean, “Gait in stroke: assessment and
rehabilitation.” Clinics in geriatric medicine,vol.15,no.4,pp.833–855,
1999.
[3] U.-B.Flansbjer,A.M.Holmb¨ ack,D.Downham,C.Patten,andJ.Lexell,
“Reliability of gait performance tests in men and women with hemipare-
sis after stroke.” Journal of rehabilitation medicine, vol. 37, no. 2, pp.
75–82, 2005.
[4] H. S. Jørgensen, H. Nakayama, H. O. Raaschou, and T. S. Olsen,
“Recovery of walking function in stroke patients: the copenhagen stroke
study,” Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 76, no. 1,
pp. 27–32, 1995.
[5] B.Frenchetal.,“Repetitivetasktrainingforimprovingfunctionalability
after stroke,” Stroke, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. e98–e99, 2009.
[6] R. P. Van Peppen, G. Kwakkel, S. Wood-Dauphinee, H. J. Hendriks,
P. J. Van der Wees, and J. Dekker, “The impact of physical therapy on
functional outcomes after stroke: what’s the evidence?” Clin Rehabil,
vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 833–862, Dec. 2004.
[7] A.-L. Hsu, P.-F. Tang, and M.-H. Jan, “Analysis of impairments inﬂu-
encing gait velocity and asymmetry of hemiplegic patients after mild
to moderate stroke,” Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation,
vol. 84, no. 8, pp. 1185–1193, 2003.
[8] K. K. Patterson, W. H. Gage, D. Brooks, S. E. Black, and W. E. McIlroy,
“Evaluation of gait symmetry after stroke: a comparison of current
methods and recommendations for standardization,” Gait & posture,
vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 241–246, 2010.
[9] G. Rosati, “The place of robotics in post-stroke rehabilitation,” Expert
Review of Medical Devices, vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 753–758, 2010.
[10] G. Colombo, M. Joerg, R. Schreier, V. Dietz et al., “Treadmill training
of paraplegic patients using a robotic orthosis,” Journal of rehabilitation
research and development, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 693–700, 2000.
[11] A. Pennycott, D. Wyss, H. Vallery, V. Klamroth-Marganska, R. Riener
et al., “Towards more effective robotic gait training for stroke rehabili-
tation: a review,” Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation, vol. 9,
no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2012.
[12] V. S. Huang and J. W. Krakauer, “Robotic neurorehabilitation: a compu-
tational motor learning perspective,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and
Rehabilitation, vol. 6, no. 1, p. 5, 2009.
[13] D. P. Ferris, G. S. Sawicki, and A. Domingo, “Powered lower limb or-
thoses for gait rehabilitation.” Topics in spinal cord injury rehabilitation,
vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 34–49, Jan. 2005.
[14] D. J. Reinkensmeyer et al., “Tools for understanding and optimizing
robotic gait training,” Journal of rehabilitation research and develop-
ment, vol. 43, no. 5, p. 657, 2006.
[15] D. J. Rutherford and C. Hubley-Kozey, “Explaining the hip adduction
moment variability during gait: Implications for hip abductor strength-
ening,” Clinical Biomechanics, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 267–273, 2009.
[16] R. R. Neptune, S. A. Kautz, and F. E. Zajac, “Contributions of the
individual ankle plantar ﬂexors to support, forward progression and
swing initiation during walking.” Journal of biomechanics, vol. 34,
no. 11, pp. 1387–98, Nov. 2001.
[17] S.K.Banala,S.H.Kim,S.K.Agrawal,andJ.P.Scholz,“Robotassisted
gait training with active leg exoskeleton (alex),” Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 17, no. 1, pp.
2–8, 2009.
[18] P. Stegall, K. Winfree, D. Zanotto, and S. Agrawal, “Rehabilitation
exoskeleton design: Exploring the effect of the anterior lunge degree
of freedom,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 838–
846, 2013.
[19] L. Righetti, J. Buchli, and A. J. Ijspeert, “Dynamic hebbian learning in
adaptive frequency oscillators,” Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena, vol.
216, no. 2, pp. 269–281, 2006.
[20] A.Gams,A.J.Ijspeert,S.Schaal,andJ.Lenarˇ ciˇ c,“On-linelearningand
modulation of periodic movements with nonlinear dynamical systems,”
Autonomous robots, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 3–23, 2009.
[21] R. Ronsse, N. Vitiello, T. Lenzi, J. van den Kieboom, M. C. Carrozza,
and A. J. Ijspeert, “Human–robot synchrony: ﬂexible assistance using
adaptive oscillators,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 1001–1012, 2011.
[22] T.Lenzi,D.Zanotto,P.Stegall,M.Carrozza,andS.Agrawal,“Reducing
muscleeffortinwalkingthroughpoweredexoskeletons,”in 2012 Annual
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
Biology Society (EMBC), 2012, pp. 3926–3929.
[23] W. van Dijk, H. van der Kooij, B. Koopman, and E. H. van Asseldonk,
“Improving the transparency of a rehabilitation robot by exploiting the
cyclic behaviour of walking,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference
on Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2013.
[24] D. Zanotto, P. Stegall, and S. K. Agrawal, “ALEX III: a novel robotic
platform for gait training, design the 4-dof leg,” in Proc. of the IEEE Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automaton ICRA2013, 2013, sent for publication.
[25] D. Reinkensmeyer, J. Wynne, and S. Harkema, “A robotic tool for
studying locomotor adaptation and rehabilitation,” in 24th International
Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society,
vol. 3, oct. 2002, pp. 2353 – 2354 vol.3.
[26] J. Emken, J. Wynne, S. Harkema, and D. Reinkensmeyer, “A robotic de-
vice for manipulating human stepping,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 185 – 189, feb. 2006.
[27] D. Zanotto, P. Stegall, and S. K. Agrawal, “Improving transparency
of powered exoskeletons using force/torque sensors on the support-
ing cuffs,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Rehabilitation
Robotics (ICORR), 2013.
[28] J.W.NobleandS.D.Prentice,“Adaptationtounilateralchangeinlower
limb mechanical properties during human walking,” Experimental brain
research, vol. 169, no. 4, pp. 482–495, 2006.
[29] T. D. Royer, P. E. Martin et al., “Manipulations of leg mass and moment
of inertia: effects on energy cost of walking,” Med Sci Sports Exerc,
vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 649–56, 2005.
[30] H. Skinner and R. Barrack, “Ankle weighting effect on gait in able-
bodied adults.” Archives of physical medicine and rehabilitation, vol. 71,
no. 2, p. 112, 1990.
729
