Correlative Microscopy for Nanomanipulation of Sub-Cellular
Structures
Z. Gong
†
, B.K. Chen
†
, J. Liu, C. Zhou, D. Anchel, X. Li, D.P. Bazett-Jones, and Y . Sun
Abstract— Nanomanipulation under scanning electron mi-
croscopy (SEM) has been demonstrated as an enabling tech-
nique for the manipulation and characterization of nanomate-
rials. We recently developed nanomanipulation techniques for
the extraction and identiﬁcation of DNA contained within sub-
nuclear locations of a single cell nucleus. In nanomanipulation
of DNA, a key step is target identiﬁcation through SEM-
ﬂuorescence correlative imaging. Existing image correlation
techniques often require ﬁducial marks and/or manual feature
selection or data training, which are unsuitable for DNA
nanomanipulation. This paper presents an approach for cor-
relating SEM-ﬂuorescence microscopy images, proven effective
in processing images taken under poor SEM imaging conditions
imposed by the necessity of preserving DNA’s biochemical
integrity. The performance of the image correlation approach
under different imaging conditions was quantitatively evalu-
ated. Compared to manual correlation by skilled operators,
the automated correlation approach demonstrated an order
of magnitude higher speed. The SEM-ﬂuorescence correlation
approach enables targeted nanomanipulation of sub-cellular
structures under SEM.
I. INTRODUCTION
The internal organization of DNA inside a cell nucleus is
structured. Disruption of the organization contributes to the
aberrant read-out of the DNA’s information, which causes
diseases such as cancers. Evidence has suggested that the
different sub-nuclear structures (e.g., nucleolus [1], nuclear
bodies [2], transcription factories [3]) coordinately regulate
the positioning and expression of genes.
To understand how genes co-reside around preferred sub-
nuclear structures, it is essential to identify the genes located
around these sub-nuclear structures. We recently developed
a new technique capable of extraction and identifying genes
located in the proximity of a speciﬁc sub-nuclear struc-
ture [4]. The technique involves nanomanipulation inside a
scanning electron microscope (SEM) to physically extract
minute amount of biomaterial from a desired location inside
a cell nucleus, and biochemically amplifying and sequencing
the genes contained within. We did not choose to use atomic
force microscopy (AFM) [5] [6] [7] for manipulating the sub-
nuclear structures because in AFM, the same AFM cantilever
tip is used for both imaging and manipulation, which make
simultaneous imaging and manipulation difﬁcult, and more
important can lead to DNA cross contaminations.
†
These authors contributed equally to this work.
David Anchel and David P. Bazett-Jones are with the Genetics and
Genome Biology Program, the Hospital for Sick Children, 555 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X8, Canada
The other authors are with the Advanced Micro and Nanosystems
Laboratory, University of Toronto, 5 King’s College Road, Toronto, ON
M5S 3G8, Canada, Email: sun@mie.utoronto.ca
Fig. 1. Correlation between SEM and ﬂuorescence imaging for visualizing
sub-cellular structures to identify manipulation targets.
A key step in DNA extraction using nanomanipulation is to
correlate SEM images with ﬂuorescent images for identifying
target of interest (Fig. 1). Fluorescence imaging permits easy
visualization of sub-cellular structures, speciﬁc protein, and
nucleic acid, many of which are not clearly visible in SEM
imaging. In the meanwhile, SEM images provide higher
imaging magniﬁcation and resolution. We conducted image
correlation manually using commercially available general-
purposed software; however, the process demands careful
manual adjustments of image size, position, rotation, and
distortions to achieve a reasonable correlation accuracy.
To improve the speed and accuracy of image correlation,
image processing algorithms were developed to automati-
cally establish correspondence between images acquired by
different microscopy techniques. Correlative imaging is a
challenging multi-modal and multi-scale image registration
problem. The conventional microscopy image correlation
techniques require the physical addition of ﬁducial marks
to the sample as landmarks. These landmarks can be eas-
ily identiﬁed in images captured under different modes of
microscopy (e.g., SEM and ﬂuorescence) [8] [9] [10] [11].
However, our DNA extraction task must be conducted under
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5209
nano spatula
cell sample
SEM pole piece
65°
moveable in 
XYZ via 
nanomanipulator
Fig. 2. DNA nanomanipulation setup inside SEM. Cell sample is mounted
on an XYZ nanomanipulator, facing the stationary end tool (nano spatula).
speciﬁc SEM imaging conditions with limited imaging reso-
lution, imposed by the necessity of preserving the biochem-
ical integrity of the sample. This poor imaging condition
makes the identiﬁcation of nanometer-sized ﬁducial marks
difﬁcult. Although methods also exist requiring no ﬁducial
marks [12] [13] for image correlation, these methods are
time consuming due to heavy manual inventions required
(e.g., manually select features, data training etc.), or require
special reference marks on the sample substrate.
To cope with translation, rotation, and scaling differences
between images, scale invariant feature transform (SIFT)
descriptor [14] is a powerful technique for detecting a set
of local feature vectors for image registration. Mikolajczyk
et al. evaluated the performance of various local invariant
feature descriptors and concluded that the SIFT descriptor
outperformed other descriptors [15]. The SIFT algorithm,
however, cannot extract the afﬁne transformed (i.e., distorted)
features. This challenge was overcome by the fully afﬁne
invariant SIFT (ASIFT) approach [16], with the drawback
of signiﬁcantly more computationally demanding than SIFT.
In this paper, the ASIFT algorithm is used to cor-
relate SEM and ﬂuorescent images for identifying sub-
cellular structures. It was accelerated by graphic processing
unit (GPU) to enhance the speed and accuracy of SEM-
ﬂuorescence image correlation. The correlation results under
different imaging conditions were quantitatively evaluated.
The suitability of the approach for SEM-based nanomanip-
ulation of sub-cellular structures is discussed.
II. DNA NANO-EXTRACTION
For the completeness of this paper, a brief overview of
our DNA nanomanipulation process is introduced in this
section. In sample preparation, cells are sliced into thin cross
sections using cryomicrotome, and its ﬂuorescent images
fluorescent
labeled target
chromatins
chromatins
ﬂuorescent 
labeled 
target
(a)
(c) (d)
(b)
Fig. 3. DNA extraction from within a single cell nucleus. (a) Locating
the cell of interest inside SEM, guided by correlated ﬂuorescent image (not
shown). (b) Landing the nano spatula tip onto the target of interest, and slide
the cell fragments onto the beveled surface. (c) Lifting up the nano spatula
along with the extracted cell fragment. (d) SEM image taken after DNA
extraction. The SEM images were taken under higher electron energy (1kV)
and slower scan rate to enhance image quality. In reality, lower electron
energy is used (0.4kV) to ensure survival of DNA.
are taken. After transferring the sample into SEM, the
ﬂuorescent images are correlated with the SEM images to
identify targets of interest for manipulation. Fig. 2 shows
the nanomanipulation setup inside SEM. Cell sample is
mounted on the nanomanipulator, which provides close-
looped, nanometer motion resolution along XYZ axes [17].
The custom fabricated end tool, termed nano spatula, is
mounted horizontally on a stationary support, facing the
slanted sample substrate. The nanomanipulation system and
the nano spatula are controlled to physically ‘scoop up’
the target within a single cell nucleus (Fig. 3). Finally, the
extracted material is removed from the SEM, ampliﬁed by
polymerase chain reaction and sequenced to identify the
genes.
To minimize electron beam damage to DNA, the accel-
erating voltage of SEM imaging must be kept low, at the
expense of signiﬁcantly increasing SEM image noise level.
Moreover, the cell sample is tilted to minimize electron
penetration depth into the sample, which causes distortions
to SEM images. Image distortion caused by sample tilting
can be largely compensated by the SEM itself; however,
this requires accurate knowledge of sample tilting angles.
In standard SEM imaging, sample tilting angle is estimated
via manual trial and error.
The necessary low accelerating voltages and sample tilt-
ing, for preserving the integrity of DNA during SEM imaging
and nanomanipulation, result in noisy and distorted images.
In addition, cells’ ﬂuorescent images are taken in the wet
state, while the SEM images are taken in the dry vacuum
environment. Experimental observation reveal that the cell
sample shrinks inside SEM (vs. wet state under ﬂuorescence
imaging). This complication further distorts the images.
5210
electron beam
Fig. 4. Sample tilting angle estimation under SEM imaging.
III. SEM-FLUORESCENCE IMAGE CORRELATION
This section describes an image correlation procedure
developed for nano-extraction of DNA. The ﬁrst step is to
estimate the cell sample tilting angle. It is input into the
SEM to automatically compensate for most of the image
distortions caused by sample tilting. SEM images are then
denoised in real-time using GPU accelerated non-local (NL)
means [18] ﬁltering and are correlated with ﬂuorescent
images using the ASIFT method.
A. Estimation of sample tilting angle
Most SEMs has an integrated function to compensate for
image distortions caused by sample tilting, given that the
tilting angle is accurately known. For each DNA nanoma-
nipulation experiment, the sample tilting angle varies slightly
due to mechanical misalignments of the setup. For calibra-
tion, a sample containing micrometer-sized reference object
(square shown in Fig. 4) is placed adjacent to the cell sample.
Depending upon the tilting angle (?) of the cell sample,
the sides of the square reference would appear shorter in
proportion according to trigonometry. Because the SEM
image is nearly an orthogonal parallel projection [19], the
tilting angle is ? = arccos
dy
dx
. Using Canny edge detection
and Hough transform, lines are detected and colored in red
shown in Fig. 4.
B. Image denoising
The NL-means algorithm [20] ﬁlters a noisy image v(i)
by computing a weighted average of all the pixels in a search
window.
NL[v](i) =
X
j?I
1
Z(i)
e
?
kv(N
i
)?v(N
j
)k
2
2,?
h
2
v(j) (1)
In our previous work [18], we demonstrated that as a pre-
processing step for SEM image analysis, NL-means ﬁl-
tering outperforms other popular denoising algorithms. In
this work, we apply NL-means ﬁltering to SEM images
before performing image registration for increasing image
correlation accuracy.
C. Image registration
The ASIFT algorithm introduces an afﬁne model to the
SIFT descriptor for effective extraction of distorted image
features. Assuming image distortions are caused by view-
point changes, image distortions can be locally expressed by
afﬁne planar transforms [16]. The deformation model of
image u(x,y) is u(x,y) ? u(ax + by + e,cx + dy + f).
A =

a b
c d

is a linear planar map having the following
decomposition
A =?

cos? ?sin?
sin? cos?

? 0
0 1

cos? ?sin?
sin? cos?

(2)
where ? denotes the rotation angle and ? is the scale factor,
both of which can be estimated with the SIFT algorithm. ?
is latitude angle and ? is longitude angle, and the two deﬁne
the imaging axis orientation.
The ASIFT algorithm involves two steps. Firstly, an im-
age pair (one SEM image and one ﬂuorescent image) to
be registered is individually transformed by simulating a
large set of linear distortions caused by the change of the
longitude angle? and latitude angle?. Secondly, it performs
SIFT comparison of all the simulated images generated to
ﬁnd correct matching features. Since every three pairs of
matching point features determines a unique afﬁne transfor-
mation, least squares ﬁt is used to compute a reﬁned afﬁne
transformation. With the computed afﬁne transformation, our
system overlays the ﬂuorescent image on top of SEM image
to identify the target region in the SEM image.
For a typical SEM image with a size of 640? 480, the
traditional CPU implementation of ASIFT algorithm costs
more than two minutes. We accelerated this computation via
GPU since the the problem can be expressed as data-parallel
computations. The ﬁrst step of ASIFT, simulating distortions
by varying imaging axis, can be fully parallelized because
the transformations applied to the different pixels are mutu-
ally independent. The second step of ASIFT, although not
parallelized in nature, can still be accelerated by exploiting
GPU memory architectures such as shared memory.
D. Correlation accuracy evaluation
Mean absolute error (MAE) is used in this work to
measure the accuracy of image correlation with the ASIFT
algorithm. In manual benchmarking, a skilled operator care-
fully aligns a large number of features over the entire image
(vs. using a few feature points only). Manual alignment
parameters such as rotational angles and scaling ratios are
recorded and used to create an afﬁne transformation matrix.
Each feature point in the SEM image is transformed onto the
corresponding ﬂuorescent image using both the benchmark-
ing matrix and the matrix produced by the ASIFT method.
MAE is then determined by averaging all the errors.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Tilt angle estimation
A calibration sample that contains micrometer-sized
square features was used to evaluate the effectiveness of
sample tilt angle estimation. The dimensions of a tilted
square were measured through SEM imaging, and the sample
tilting angle was estimated via the method described in
5211
0
50
100
150
200
250
2 8 32
MAE (nm)
(a)
ASIFT
denoising+ASIFT
frame integration
(b)
Fig. 5. (a) Effect of image noise level on correlation accuracy. The
highest frame rate of the SEM is ?20Hz; thus, 2 frames integration
corresponds to 10Hz frame rate. Under each frame integration setting, ten
SEM-ﬂuorescence image pairs were computed, and the error bars represent
±1 standard deviation. (b) A sample SEM image taken with 2 frames
integration, before denoising (left) and after denoising (right).
Section III-A. The distortion compensated image based on
the estimated sample tilting angle was compared to the
actual dimensions of the square feature, measured from the
top view. The differences in the square’s side length were
within 10 pixels (corresponds to?±2.5 degrees sample tilt).
This effective distortion compensation signiﬁcantly facili-
tates SEM-ﬂuorescence image correlation.
B. Correlation Accuracy
The correlation accuracy is quantiﬁed through MAE, as
described in Section III-D. Two main factors inﬂuence the
image correlation accuracy, including SEM image noise level
and SEM magniﬁcation. Fluorescent images were taken at
the highest magniﬁcation and had inheritably low noise level.
1) Image noise level vs. correlation accuracy: Fig. 5
shows quantitatively how different noise levels in SEM
imaging affect image correlation accuracy. Different SEM
image noise levels were simulated by choosing different
amounts of image frame integration. With higher frame
integration, the frame rate became lower. Lower frame rates
results in lower noise levels. As shown in Fig. 5, the accuracy
of image registration is highly dependent upon the noise level
of SEM images.
For nano-extraction of DNA inside SEM, high frame rates
(i.e., lower frame integration) allow more real-time and better
visualization of the nanomanipulation process. To improve
the correlation accuracy at high frame rates, the system per-
0
100
200
300
400
500
1 2
MAE (nm)
(a)
3 4 0.5
magnification (X1,000)
(b) (c)
Fig. 6. (a) Correlation accuracy under different SEM imaging magniﬁca-
tions. (b) and (c) represent two SEM magniﬁcation extremes, where ASIFT
was found to have difﬁculty in identifying matching features needed for
image correlation.
forms NL-means denoising pre-processing on SEM images
before correlation is made. This pre-processing step was
found to signiﬁcantly improve the MAE of correlation at
high SEM frame rates. In experiments, nanomanipulation
was typically conducted under 10Hz SEM imaging (i.e.,
‘frame integration’ = 2 in Fig. 5(b)). In this case, NL-
means denoising improved the MAE of SEM-ﬂuorescence
image correlation by 62%, compared to directly performing
correlation without denoising SEM images. At low frame
rates (e.g., 32 frames integrated), little noise existed; hence,
the denoising algorithm undesirably reduced image con-
trast slightly on these low-noised SEM imgaes, resulting in
slightly reduced correlation accuracy.
2) Image magniﬁcation vs. correlation accuracy: Since
image magniﬁcation affects the number of identiﬁable fea-
tures in the ﬁeld of view, it plays a key role in the accuracy
of SEM-ﬂuorescence image registration. Under each SEM
imaging magniﬁcation, ten random regions of the cell sample
were correlated with its corresponding ﬂuorescent images,
and the correlation accuracy was computed and summarized
in Fig. 6(a). The results show that correlation accuracy (i.e.,
reduced MAE) increased with image magniﬁcation, up until
a magniﬁcation of?2,400X, after which the trend reversed.
Under the SEM imaging conditions that ensure low elec-
tron beam-induced DNA damage, only the cell membrane
contour is easily visible in SEM images. As the image
magniﬁcation increases, the cell membrane contour becomes
better deﬁned from the increase in image resolution, at the
expense that the number of cells within the ﬁeld of view
5212
Fig. 7. SEM and ﬂuorescent images. Black lines connect the identiﬁed matching feature points.
decreases. At magniﬁcations lower than 2,400X, the effect
of higher image resolution outweighs the loss in having
fewer cells/features within the ﬁeld of view. Therefore, the
correlation accuracy improves with increase in magniﬁcation.
This trend reverses at magniﬁcations higher than 2,400X
because the actual SEM imaging resolution under the poor,
DNA viable imaging conditions does not longer improve
essentially. In the meanwhile, the number of cells in the
ﬁeld of view continues to decrease at higher magniﬁcations,
reducing the number of identiﬁable features.
Image correlation failure occurred at the two magniﬁcation
extremes. For magniﬁcation <500X (Fig. 6(b)), the poor
imaging resolution often does not provide an adequate num-
ber of identiﬁable features for completing the afﬁne trans-
formation (Eq. 2). At the other extreme, with magniﬁcations
>4,000X (Fig. 6(c)), the number of features within the ﬁeld
of view again became too low to achieve a high correlation
accuracy.
C. Efﬁciency of GPU accelerated ASIFT
During the process of DNA extraction, several factors
caused SEM imaging to drift over time. These factors in-
clude external electromagentic interferences, sample negative
charging, and thermal drift of the nanomanipulator. This drift
in SEM imaging makes the image correlation process time
sensitive, demanding the completion of image correlation
quickly. If the computation of ASIFT takes too long, the
transformed ﬂuorescent image would not overlay well with
the live video feed from the SEM.
GPU parallel computing was utilized in our system to
speed up the computation of ASIFT. The GPU accelerated
ASIFT correlation was implemented on a standard PC (Intel
Core i7 3.6GHz CPU, 3GB DDR3 RAM, NVidia GTX560
GPU with 1GB global memory and 48kB on-chip shared
memory per block). For correlation of image pairs that
are 640? 480 pixels in size, the GPU accelerated ASIFT
took an average of 15.3± 5.7s to correlate one image pair
(n=20). This speed is approximately nine times faster than
CPU correlation (averagely 140.5± 30.3s per correlation),
(b) (c)
(a)
Fig. 8. (a) Overlaid SEM and ﬂuorescent images at low magniﬁcation.
Zooming into a single cell level reveals well correlated features between
(b) ﬂuorescent image and (c) SEM image.
and about 11 times higher than manual operation (averagely
174.9±56.4s per correlation). The average drift rate of our
nanomanipulation setup was 1.24nm/s, determined with the
method we previously reported [17]. With GPU accelerated
ASIFT, a 15.3s computation time translates to SEM image
drift of?19nm.
5213
D. Image correlation for DNA extraction
Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 illustrate examples of SEM-ﬂuorescence
image correlation results. The SEM images were taken under
SEM conditions that ensure DNA viability, at a frame rate of
10Hz. They were denoised in real time by GPU accelerated
NL-means ﬁltering. The ﬂuorescent images were converted
to grayscale image followed by intensity inversion. Fig. 7
shows the registration of the images, where the black lines
connect matching feature points in the SEM and ﬂuorescent
images. Fig. 8 shows the transformed ﬂuorescent image
overlaid on top of the SEM image. Zooming into a single
cell level shows well correlated images (Fig. 8(b),(c)). From
ﬂuorescence imaging, the location of manipulation target is
the overlapping region between the red and green ﬂuorescent
spots (NB4 cell nuclear body,?0.8?m in size) in Fig. 8(b)
(arrow labeled). The corresponding location in the SEM
image is shown in Fig. 8(c). The MAE value was quantiﬁed
to be 89nm, which is the accuracy of SEM-ﬂuorescence
correlation of this image pair.
V. CONCLUSION
In SEM-based nanomanipulation of biomaterials within
sub-cellular structures, electron beam induced damage to the
biomaterials such as DNA must be minimized in order to
preserve their biochemical integrity. The SEM imaging con-
ditions suitable for this purpose, however, result in noisy and
distorted images. This paper described the use of NL-means
denoising and ASIFT image correlation for locating a target
of interest within SEM and ﬂuorescent images. Through
accelerated GPU implementations of the algorithms, denois-
ing of SEM images was achieved in real time, and image
correlation was shown to be eleven times faster than manual
operation. Various factors inﬂuencing the performance of
the proposed SEM-ﬂuorescence image correlation process
were evaluated. Our SEM-ﬂuorescence correlation approach
requires no ﬁducial marks and no manual feature selection
or data training, enabling targeted nanomanipulation of sub-
cellular structures under SEM.
REFERENCES
[1] T. M. Yusufzai, H. Tagami, Y . Nakatani, and G. Felsenfeld, “{CTCF}
tethers an insulator to subnuclear sites, suggesting shared insulator
mechanisms across species,” Molecular Cell, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 291
– 298, 2004.
[2] S. Schoenfelder, T. Sexton, L. Chakalova, N. F. Cope, A. Horton,
S. Andrews, S. Kurukuti, J. A. Mitchell, D. Umlauf, D. S. Dimitrova,
C. H. Eskiw, Y . Luo, C.-L. Wei, Y . Ruan, J. J. Bieker, and P. Fraser,
“Preferential associations between co-regulated genes reveal a tran-
scriptional interactome in erythroid cells,” Nature Genetics, vol. 42,
no. 1, pp. 53–61, 2009.
[3] C. Osborne and C. Eskiw, “Where shall we meet? a role for genome
organisation and nuclear sub-compartments in mediating interchromo-
somal interactions.” Journal of Cellular Biochemistry, vol. 104, no. 5,
pp. 1553–1561, 2008.
[4] B. K. Chen, D. Anchel, Y . Sun, and D. P. Bazett-Jones, “Nano-
dissection and identiﬁcation of gene loci from single cells.” September
2013, submitted to Nature Methods.
[5] H. G. Hansma, J. Vesenka, C. Siegerist, G. Kelderman, H. Morrett,
R. L. Sinsheimer, V . Elings, C. Bustamante, and P. K. Hansma,
“Reproducible imaging and dissection of plasmid dna under liquid
with the atomic force microscope,” Science, vol. 256, no. 5060, pp.
1180–1184, 1992.
[6] J. Hu, Y . Zhang, H. Gao, M. Li, and U. Hartmann, “Artiﬁcial dna
patterns by mechanical nanomanipulation,” Nano Letters, vol. 2, no. 1,
pp. 55–57, 2002.
[7] J. L¨ u, H. An, H. Li, X. Li, Y . Wang, M. Li, Y . Zhang, and J. Hu, “Nan-
odissection, isolation, and pcr ampliﬁcation of single dna molecules,”
Surface and Interface Analysis, vol. 38, no. 6, pp. 1010–1013, 2006.
[8] B. G. Kopek, G. Shtengel, C. S. Xu, D. A. Clayton, and H. F. Hess,
“Correlative 3d superresolution ﬂuorescence and electron microscopy
reveal the relationship of mitochondrial nucleoids to membranes,”
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 109, no. 16,
pp. 6136–6141, 2012.
[9] W. Kukulski, M. Schorb, S. Welsch, A. Picco, M. Kaksonen, and
J. A. G. Briggs, “Correlated ﬂuorescence and 3d electron microscopy
with high sensitivity and spatial precision,” The Journal of cell biology,
vol. 192, no. 1, pp. 111–119, 2011.
[10] S. Watanabe, A. Punge, G. Hollopeter, K. I. Willig, R. J. Hobson,
M. W. Davis, S. W. Hell, and E. M. Jorgensen, “Protein localization in
electron micrographs using ﬂuorescence nanoscopy,” Nature Methods,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 80–84, 2010.
[11] D. N. Fronczek, C. Quammen, H. Wang, C. Kisker, R. Superﬁne,
R. Taylor, D. A. Erie, and I. Tessmer, “High accuracy ﬁona-afm hybrid
imaging,” Ultramicroscopy, vol. 111, no. 5, pp. 350–355, 2011.
[12] T. Cao, C. Zach, S. Modla, D. Powell, K. Czymmek, and M. Nietham-
mer, “Registration for correlative microscopy using image analogies,”
in Proceedings of the 5th international conference on Biomedical
Image Registration, 2012, pp. 296–306.
[13] S. Halary, S. Duperron, and T. Boudier, “Direct image-based correl-
ative microscopy technique for coupling identiﬁcation and structural
investigation of bacterial symbionts associated with metazoans,” Ap-
plied and Environmental Microbiology, vol. 77, no. 12, pp. 4172–4179,
2011.
[14] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant key-
points,” Int. J. Comput. Vision, vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–110, Nov. 2004.
[15] K. Mikolajczyk and C. Schmid, “A performance evaluation of local
descriptors,” IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 27, no. 10,
pp. 1615–1630, 2005.
[16] J.-M. Morel and G. Yu, “Asift: A new framework for fully afﬁne
invariant image comparison,” SIAM J. Img. Sci., vol. 2, no. 2, pp.
438–469, Apr. 2009.
[17] Y . L. Zhang, Y . Zhang, C. Ru, B. K. Chen, and Y . Sun, “A load-
lock-compatible nanomanipulation system for scanning electron mi-
croscope,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. PP, no. 99,
pp. 1 –8, 2011.
[18] Z. Gong, B. K. Chen, J. Liu, and Y . Sun, “Robotic probing of nano
structures inside scanning electron microscopy,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, accepted for publication, 2014.
[19] E. Sch¨ onherr and E. Winckler, “A sample holder for measuring
the interfacial angles of small crystals using a scanning electron
microscope,” Journal of Crystal Growth, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 353 –
354, 1976.
[20] A. Buades, B. Coll, and J.-M. Morel, “A non-local algorithm for image
denoising,” in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2005. CVPR
2005. IEEE Computer Society Conference on, vol. 2, june 2005, pp.
60 – 65.
5214
