?5 0 5 10 15 20
0
50
100
150
Horizontal Distance (cm)
Vertical Distance (cm)
1st Jump
2nd Jump
3rd Jump
4th Jump
5th Jump
Average
Fig. 7. Jumping experimental results: The trajectories for ﬁve jumps are
shown with the robot jumping from right to left. An average trajectory is
also shown for reference.
We performed ﬁve consecutive experiments, with the
jumping trajectories shown in Fig. 7. Only half of each
trajectory is shown due to the symmetrical property. The tra-
jectories are obtained from the video by manually selecting
the robot’s position in each frame. Since the robot is not very
clear in the video with high speed, it is difﬁcult to locate the
exact position in each frame. Therefore, the trajectories are
not smooth as shown in the ﬁgure. In fact, the true trajectory
should be a parabola if the air resistance is neglected [3].
From the ﬁve experiments, we obtain the average jumping
height as 143.6±2.2 cm and the average jumping distance
as 59.3±4.3 cm. Detailed experiments are shown in the
accompanied video submission. The jumping performances
are consistent since the standard deviation for ﬁve jumping
is only 2.2 cm for height and 4.3 cm for distance. Compared
with our previous design in [3], the robot jumps much
higher because the new design reduces the foot’s mass,
which should be as light as possible to jump higher [3].
Furthermore, the new robot wastes less energy in mid-air
since it rotates less as seen from the videos. The reason is
that the new design has a smaller initial angular momentum
after take-off since the motion of the body can only move
linearly with respect to the foot by the two constraint carbon
ﬁber rods.
B. Self-righting Experiments
We also conducted experiments to test the robot’s self-
righting ability by placing the robot on the ground. Ten
experiments with a random side touching the ground are
performed. The robot can stand up for all these experiments.
Videos are recorded during the self-righting process. Fig. 8
shows one of the experimental results for standing up from
the left side. Six frames with an equal time interval from
the video are shown in the ﬁgure. An additional experiment
for self-righting from the right side is included in the
accompanied video submission.
Since we use two legs for self-righting, it is important to
distribute the weight appropriately to make sure the robot’s
center of gravity lies near the two legs. Because the gear
train for energy storage occupies one side of the body, we
place the battery and control board on the other side of the
body to balance the weight as can be seen from the robot
prototype in Fig. 1.
C. Running and Turning Experiments
We tested the running and turning ability for the robot
as well. The running experiment was setup as follows. We
placed the robot besides a ruler, and let the robot run from
left to the right and recorded the corresponding video. For
the turning experiment, we placed the robot parallel to a line
marker, and then let the robot turn with its maximum speed.
Experimental results are shown in the accompanied video
submission. We obtain the average speed for both running
and turning by analyzing the video. From the videos, both
running and turning speeds vary with the surfaces on which
the robot is operated. For smooth ground such as a white
board shown in the video, the average running speed is 5.0
cm/s, and the average turning speed is 16
?
/s. For rough
ground such as the cement shown in the video, the running
speed decreases to 4.4 cm/s, while the turning speed surges
to 150
?
/s.
D. Results Comparison
We compare the results with existing robots that have
the running and jumping ability using the indices listed in
Table I. We also include our previous jumping robot for
comparison. The ﬁrst index is the mass of the robot, while
the second is the maximum size. The third and fourth indices
list the jumping height and distance, respectively. Due to
different take-off angles for each robot, we calculate the
normalized jumping height with a 90
?
take-off angle as the
ﬁfthindex usingthemethod described in[3].The sixthindex
represents the height that the robot can jump given its mass
and size, which is obtained from dividing the normalized
jumping height by the mass and size. The seventh index is
the running speed, and the last index—similar to the sixth
index—is the running speed given the robot’s mass and size.
Asseeninthetable,theMSUJump-runnerhasthelightest
weight and smallest size among all the robots that have
the running and jumping ability. Moreover, the jumping
performance is better than all the other robots except the
Sand Flea as can be seen from the normalized jumping
height. If we take the mass and size into account, the
MSU Jump-runner has a number 64.5, which is much larger
than the Sand Flea with a number 0.37. Finally, although
the running speed for MSU Jump-runner is less than the
availabledataofMini-WhegsandSandFlea,itiscomparable
to them if we consider the mass and size as indicated by the
last index in the table.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a miniature running and jumping robot
is presented. The robot can locomote on ﬂat ground with
wheels and jump to overcome obstacles much larger than
its own size. It has a compact size (9 cm) and a small
mass (25 grams) including the onboard energy and control
5119
