  
? 
Abstract— In vitreoretinal practice, controlled tremor-free 
motion and limitation of applied forces to the retina are two 
highly desired features. This study addresses both requirements 
with a new integrated system: a force-sensing motorized micro-
forceps combined with an active tremor-canceling handheld 
micromanipulator, known as Micron. The micro-forceps is a 20 
Ga instrument that is mechanically decoupled from its handle 
and senses the transverse forces at its tip with an accuracy of 
0.3 mN. Membrane peeling trials on a bandage phantom 
revealed a 60-95% reduction in the 2-20 Hz band in both the tip 
force and position spectra, while peeling forces remained below 
the set safety threshold. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Retinal microsurgery ranks among the most challenging 
areas of surgical practice, requiring the manipulation of 
extremely delicate tissues by various micron scale maneuvers 
and the application of very small forces. Among vitreoretinal 
procedures, membrane peeling is a standard task in which a 
very thin fibrous membrane on the retina surface is 
delaminated, either by using a pick or micro-forceps. During 
this operation, instruments need to be moved relatively 
slowly, within a range of 0.1–0.5 mm/s. Furthermore, the 
required forces for delamination routinely lie below the 
surgeon’s sensory threshold. Most of these forces were 
shown to be below 7.5 mN in porcine cadaver eyes, and only 
19% of events with this force magnitude can be felt by 
surgeons [1]. In manual practice, surgeons generally lack 
tactile responses or force feedback, and rely largely on visual 
cues. They visually monitor local surface deformation and 
adjust peeling speed in order to prevent application of 
excessive forces, which can give rise to serious 
complications such as iatrogenic retinal breaks [2], vitreous 
hemorrhage, and subretinal hemorrhage [3]. This task is 
extremely challenging and depends upon extensive 
experience, considering the other factors involved in the 
procedure, which include poor visualization, inconsistent 
tissue properties, physiological hand tremor of the surgeon, 
fatigue and patient motion. Assistive systems which both 
eliminate tremor from tool motion and limit applied forces 
 
*Research supported in part by the National Institutes of Health under 
R01 EB007969, and R01 EB000526, and in part by Johns Hopkins 
University internal funds. 
B. Gonenc, R. H. Taylor, and I. Iordachita are with CISST ERC at Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218 USA (e-mail: 
bgonenc1,rht,iordachita@jhu.edu) (Corresponding author: Berk Gonenc, 
phone: 360-975-1676; e-mail: bgonenc1@jhu.edu). 
J. Handa and P. Gehlbach are with the Wilmer Eye Institute at The 
Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287 USA (e-mail: 
jthanda,pgelbach@jhmi.edu) 
E. Feldman is with Viterbi School of Engineering at the University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles CA, 90089, USA (e-mail: 
erfeldma@usc.edu) 
could be a significant solution in addressing these challenges 
and thus improve surgical outcomes. 
In order to reduce physiological hand tremor, provide 
fine motion control, and consequently enhance microsurgical 
accuracy, several teleoperated robotic systems have been 
developed by different researchers [4-9]. In contrast to these 
approaches, the Steady-Hand Robot developed at the Johns 
Hopkins University (JHU) is based upon a cooperative 
control scheme between the surgeon and a stiff non-
backdrivable robotic arm [10]. Micron was designed as a 
fully-handheld micromanipulator by Riviere et al. at 
Carnegie Mellon University [11]. 
Focusing on the lack of force feedback, a family of force-
sensing instruments was developed at JHU using fiber Bragg 
grating (FBG) strain sensors to measure the forces directly at 
the tool tip. First, a single degree of freedom (DOF) force-
sensing tool [12] and then a 2-DOF pick-like instrument [13] 
were built with FBG sensors. The 2-DOF pick was used in 
combination with the Steady-Hand Robot [14] as well as 
with Micron [15]. Compared with a pick tool, forceps 
provide increased control due to the additional degree of 
freedom for grasping the tissue. This enables removal of the 
membrane from the eye in a single step [16], which is why 
forceps are more practical and more commonly used in 
vitreoretinal surgery. With this motivation, tool development 
continued with a manual pair of 2-DOF force-sensing 
forceps [17], followed by a 2-DOF forceps that can be used 
with the Steady-Hand Robot [18]. These can sense only the 
transverse tool-to-tissue interaction forces, which is a 
limitation for practical use in membrane peeling. For this 
reason, the design concept of a 3-DOF force-sensing forceps 
compatible with the Steady-Hand Robot was proposed, but is 
challenged by the available fabrication techniques [19]. 
 
Figure 1.  (a) Motorized force-sensing micro-forceps integrated with a 
handheld micromanipulator (Micron), (b) 2-DOF force-sensing micro-
forceps for the Steady-Hand Robot [18] (c) Original 23Ga disposable 
forceps (Alcon, USA). 
Towards Robot-Assisted Vitreoretinal Surgery: Force-Sensing 
Micro-Forceps Integrated with a Handheld Micromanipulator* 
Berk Gonenc, Student Member, IEEE, Ellen Feldman, Student Member, IEEE, Peter Gehlbach, Member, IEEE 
James Handa, Russell H. Taylor, Fellow Member, IEEE, and Iulian Iordachita, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1399
  
Integrating the developed force-sensing tools with the 
Steady-Hand Robot and Micron forms two distinctly 
different assistive systems that can address both tremor and 
force limitation problems in membrane peeling. In our recent 
comparison study [20], we evaluated membrane peeling 
performance using these systems with the latest available 
force-sensing tool for each manipulator: a 2-DOF forceps for 
the Steady-Hand Robot, and a 2-DOF pick for Micron. 
Results showed that Micron performance was significantly 
challenged by the lack of a forceps tool for this system. 
Using the micro-forceps with the Steady-Hand Robot has 
revealed superior performance, as one can hold the tissue 
firmly and manipulate it more easily without slippage. In 
order to improve Micron's performance in this task and to 
make a fair comparison between the two assistive systems, it 
is crucial to have a compact lightweight force-sensing 
forceps module. In comparison to a manual or Steady–Hand 
Robot compatible forceps, this presents a completely 
different design problem with much stricter constraints. 
In this paper, we report a new integrated assistive system 
for membrane peeling, combining an active tremor-canceling 
handheld micromanipulator with a force-sensing motorized 
micro-forceps. In the following sections, we will first present 
the design and calibration of our new force-sensing tool. 
This will be followed by system integration steps and the 
results of peeling experiments on a bandage phantom. The 
paper concludes with a discussion of the results. 
II. MOTORIZED FORCE-SENSING MICRO-FORCEPS 
A. Design 
The design of the force-sensing micro-forceps includes 
two main parts: the handle mechanism (Fig 2.a), and the 
motorized force-sensing tip (Fig. 2.b and c). 
For the handle mechanism, it is desirable to preserve the 
intuitive actuation mechanism on the existing disposable 
forceps from Alcon, Inc. (Fort Worth, TX), which was also 
used in our previous force-sensing micro-forceps for the 
Steady-Hand Robot [18]. This mechanism can be actuated 
simply by squeezing the tool handle. The squeezing motion 
causes the tube forming the tool shaft to slide in the distal 
direction to close the graspers. In our case, however, such 
rigid coupling between handle motion and tip actuation is not 
possible, since it would significantly interfere with the 
handheld micromanipulator's actuators. Instead of such a 
mechanical coupling, we used a sliding potentiometer on the 
handle to assess forceps closure. The sides of the handle 
mechanism are normally kept propped open by two springs 
as shown in Fig 2.a. Compressing the sides causes the sliders 
to move up along the tool handle (see the video attachment), 
inducing a voltage change in the potentiometer output. With 
the help of set screws, this mechanism can clamp onto any 
cylindrical manipulator handpiece up to 25 mm in diameter, 
transforming it into a micro-forceps handle. 
In designing the motorized force-sensing tip, three main 
challenges needed to be overcome: (1) integrating force 
sensing capabilities while preserving the grasping motion of 
forceps, (2) avoiding interference between the manipulator’s 
own actuation and the opening/closing action of the forceps, 
and (3) generating a self-standing universal module for 
compatibility with various handheld manipulators. This 
requires a very compact and lightweight micro-forceps 
module that can be actuated independently of the attachment 
site on the micromanipulator, and that carries all the force-
sensing elements on it. Under these constraints we designed 
our “drop -in” micro -forceps as shown in Fig. 2.b and Fig. 
2.c. 
 
Figure 2.  Design of force-sensing micro-forceps for handheld 
micromanipulators: (a) handle mechanism (b,c) motorized force-sensing 
tip. Squeezing the handle mechanism from the sides drives the motor and 
pushes the slide assembly forward, and thus closes the grasper jaws. 
In this concept, the forceps jaws are normally open, and 
are rigidly attached to the proximal end of the module by a 
steel rod. This rod lies along the whole tool, initially passing 
through a 23 gauge (Ga) steel tube in the distal end, and then 
through the sliding assembly in the proximal end. The 23 Ga 
stainless steel tube is rigidly attached to the slide assembly. 
For actuation, a linear micro motor, Squiggle-RV-1.8 by 
New Scale Technologies Inc., was selected due to its small 
size (2.8x2.8x6 mm), light weight (0.16 grams), precision 
(0.5 µm resolution), and high force (up to 0.33 N). The shaft 
of the motor is housed by the slide assembly at both ends to 
move it back and forth along the steel rod for opening and 
closing the forceps jaws (see the video attachment). This 
requires a travel distance of 1.2 mm, which is well below the 
motor’s limit (6mm). Th e position is tracked via the NSE-
5310 magnetic position sensor located on the side of the 
slide assembly for closed-loop control. To integrate force 
sensing capabilities, FBG strain sensors (Smart Fibers, UK) 
were preferred mainly due to their small dimension, high 
sensitivity, biocompatibility, sterilizability, and immunity 
from electrostatic and electromagnetic noise. Following the 
fabrication method presented in [13], 3 FBGs were fixed on 
the 23 Ga tubular tool shaft axisymmetrically using medical 
epoxy adhesive. In order to monitor the FBGs, an optical 
sensing interrogator, sm130-700 from Micron Optics Inc. 
(Atlanta GA), was used. The outer diameter of the finalized 
tool shaft is approximately 0.9 mm, and is small enough to fit 
through a 20 Ga trocar. The module weighs less than 2 
grams. 
B. Calibration and Force Computation 
The calibration setup and protocol of the new micro-
forceps module follow [13]. A linear reproducible behavior 
was observed for all FBGs during both the x- and y-axis 
calibration procedures, as shown in Fig. 3. 
1400
  
 
Figure 3.  Calibration results in x-axis direction (upper) and in y-axis 
direction (lower). Linear behavior is observed for all FBGs in both axes. 
Based on the results in Fig. 3, the following calibration 
matrix was determined: 
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
?
? ?
01410 0
00016 0
01394 0
02192 0
03276 0
01084 0
K
.
.
.
.
.
.
 
To compute the tip forces (F) from FBG wavelength shift 
(?S), the pseudo-inverse of the obtained calibration matrix 
(K
+
) is used in the linear relationship given by (1) This 
algorithm was previously shown to effectively remove the 
influence of ambient temperature [13]. 
? F = K
+
 ?S? ????
The steel tube forming the tool shaft in our design is not 
only a functional element that provides the grasping action, 
but is also a structural element that carries the force-sensing 
FBGs. As the grasper jaws are squeezed and released, 
various external loads and frictional forces are induced on 
this tube. FBGs sense a combination of these inner actuation 
forces and the tip forces. The result is a repeated and 
consistent shift in force readings as the forceps is closed and 
opened even when there is no loading on the tip. This is 
highly undesirable as the maximum amount of shift (around 
1 mN for each transverse force as in Fig. 4) is comparable to 
the amplitude of most forces during vitreoretinal practice 
(routinely below 7.5 mN). 
 
Figure 4.  Measured forces vs. the motor position while no external force is 
applied on the forceps tip. Varying nonzero forces are observed as the 
grasper jaws are opened and closed due to inner actuation forces. Best fit 
curve is used to compensate for this effect. 
 
Figure 5.  Consistent cycles of shift in force as the forceps is opened and 
closed repeatedly. The max. amplitude of this change is reduced from 1mN 
to 0.3 mN after correction based on motor position. 
In order to model and compensate for this effect, we 
recorded the force variation with no force applied to the tip 
during 3 consecutive opening-closing cycles, which resulted 
in the mapping shown in Fig. 4. Due to grasper jaw 
geometry, material properties, and the frictional forces 
between the steel tube and forceps jaws, the behavior in Fig. 
4 is highly nonlinear, yet consistent. This mapping relates the 
actuation forces to the motor position within ±0.15mN. 
Based on the identified best fit and sensed motor position, 
the induced forces due to actuation can be estimated and 
subtracted from the measured values to obtain a corrected 
force reading. This provides a significant reduction in force 
variation as the forceps is closed and opened repeatedly. As 
shown in Fig. 5, without such correction, the maximum force 
change is around 1 mN while the correction reduces it to 0.3 
mN. This indicates that our tool is able to measure the forces 
in any direction in the xy-plane with an accuracy of 0.3 mN. 
III. SYSTEM INTEGRATION AND CONTROL SCHEME 
In order to form a complete assistive system for 
membrane peeling, the elements of the motorized force-
sensing micro-forceps were integrated with a handheld 
micromanipulator, Micron. This device is able to cancel 
physiological hand tremor by activating three piezoelectric 
actuators. The position of its handle is determined by ASAP 
optical sensors [11]. After sensing the tool motion, Micron 
separates it into involuntary and tremorous components. 
Then Micron moves its tip to counteract the involuntary 
motion component within a workspace of approximately a 
1x1x0.5 mm volume centered on the handle position. The 
control software for tremor cancellation was implemented in 
LabVIEW as shown in Fig. 6. 
The designed motorized micro-forceps module was 
mounted on the micromanipulator tip. Micron has about 1 N 
force capability, which is enough to support and move this 
additional load (smaller than 2 grams) quickly for effective 
tremor compensation. Hardware implementations were 
completed by clamping on the designed handle mechanism 
1401
  
to transform the Micron handpiece into a forceps-handle. 
The control loop associated with the actuation of the forceps 
is shown in green in Fig.6. Accordingly, analog position 
servo input is provided to the Squiggle motor controller via 
the sliding potentiometer on the handle mechanism. The 
magnetic sensor on the forceps tip provides position 
feedback to accomplish accurate closed loop control, 
opening or closing the grasper jaws without noticeable delay. 
 
Figure 6.  The control scheme of the integrated system. Accompanying the 
existing tremor canceling control loop, two more branches were added to 
provide auditory force feedback and to control forceps jaws by squeezing 
the handle. 
The existing LabVIEW control software was extended to 
include a force feedback loop as shown in blue in Fig. 6. 
During operation, the wavelength information from each 
FBG channel is collected and processed at 1 kHz and 
transmitted over TCP/IP to the LabVIEW environment. 
Forces are then computed utilizing the calibration matrix. 
Based on forceps configuration (linear motor position), the 
computed force value is corrected to obtain tip forces. These 
tip forces are then converted into auditory signals. The 
frequency of these audio signals changes with the level of the 
applied force [14]. Depending on the frequency of the 
auditory feedback (AF), the user adjusts tool motion so that 
the applied forces do not exceed 7.5 mN, which we define as 
the danger zone threshold in membrane peeling based upon 
our prior in-vivo experience [17]. 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
In order to assess the performance of the developed 
system, several peeling trials were performed by a single 
non-surgeon subject on the setup shown in Fig 7. As a 
surrogate for epiretinal membrane, 2 mm wide strips were 
cut from 19 mm Clear Bandages (RiteAid brand), which 
have previously been reported and used in our laboratory for 
similar tests [14, 20]. The bandage strips were attached to a 
plastic base with curvature (Ø 25 mm) resembling the back 
of the eye. In addition, a rubber sclerotomy constraint was 
located directly above the bandage strips. 
 
Figure 7.  Setup for membrane peeling experiments on bandage phantom. 
During the experiment, the subject was asked to (1) insert 
the micro-forceps tool through the sclerotomy point, (2) 
grasp and lift the bandage edge, and (3) peel the strip off of 
the plastic surface while keeping the tool velocity as uniform 
as possible (~0.5 mm/s) and the delaminating forces below 
the danger threshold (~7.5 mN) based on the provided 
auditory force feedback. The goal of the experiment is to 
identify any interference between the micro-forceps and 
Micron operation, and to determine whether the 
implemented hardware modifications affect the device's 
tremor canceling characteristics. For this reason, the 
experiments were done in two sets by turning the tremor 
cancellation feature on and off. Five peels were recorded per 
category, and the tests were performed in alternating order. 
Before data collection, an extensive training period (~1 hrs) 
was allowed for the subject to become accustomed to the 
system and phantom, and to minimize learning curve effects 
in the recorded measurements. During data collection, the 
tool tip force and position and the Squiggle motor position 
were recorded. Based upon the Squiggle motor position, the 
starting and ending points of the delamination were 
identified in the acquired data. The assessment was based on 
the applied forces and tool tip positions during this period. 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Measured forces on the bandage phantom are displayed 
for all trials in Fig. 8. The starting time of the task is set at 
the point when the user starts closing the grasper jaws. The 
delaminating period begins after the forceps are closed, and 
the forces after this time are of interest. During the 
delaminating period, the exerted forces in all trials remained 
below the safety threshold (7.5 mN), which displays the 
effectiveness of the auditory force feedback and agrees with 
our previous results [15, 20]. On the other hand, high 
frequency oscillations were visible when the tremor 
suppression feature of the system was not used. Upon 
activation of Micron, these oscillations were significantly 
reduced. 
The effect of physiological hand tremor is also visible in 
velocity and tip position plots. In all trials, the user managed 
to keep the peeling speed around 0.5 mm/s as desired; 
however, oscillations and difficulty increased in the absence 
of Micron tremor aid. Fig. 9 shows that the tool tip in 
Micron-assisted trials followed a much smoother trajectory 
with higher positioning accuracy in comparison to the cases 
without tremor cancellation. 
1402
  
 
Figure 8.  Measured peeling forces using bandage phantom for all trials (5 
trials/case). One of the trials was shown in darker color to highlight the 
important characteristics. Auditory feedback helps in keeping forces below 
the safety threshold (7.5 mN). The peeling speed is kept below 0.5 mm/s 
successfully in all cases, but with much difficulty when Micron is off. The 
tremor canceling feature of Micron helps in reducing high frequency 
oscillations in both tip force and tip velocity. 
In order to assess the tremor canceling effect of Micron 
in our tests, we performed frequency analyses based on both 
position and force measurements. The results are presented 
in Fig. 10. The bandwidth of human hand-eye feedback 
usually is from 0.5 Hz to 2 Hz [21]. Below 0.5 Hz, hand-eye 
feedback becomes effective. Thus, the regions below 0.5 Hz 
in these figures represent controlled actions, whereas 
frequencies above 2 Hz indicate the unintentional motion of 
the user. The postural hand tremor frequency in normal 
humans is approximately 8-10 Hz [21]. The prominence of a 
peak around 9 Hz in Micron-off trials is primarily due to the 
subject’s hand tremor. When the tremor suppression feature 
is activated, this peak is eliminated and the high-frequency 
components (2-20 Hz) are overall reduced by 60-95% in 
both the tip force and tip position spectra. 
 
Figure 9.  Tool tip trajectory during the delaminating period. The arrow 
indicates the peeling direction. Higher positioning accuracy and smoother 
paths are observed with Micron use. 
The significant reduction in the 2-20 Hz band and 
percentages comparable to our previous results with Micron 
[15, 20] confirm that there is no adverse effect in tremor 
suppression characteristics due to the newly-introduced 
micro-forceps tip module. On the contrary, the forceps allow 
for grasping—and thus a more rigid connection between the 
tool tip and membrane—which now enables us to relate the 
characteristics of the measured forces to the tool tip 
dynamics. The common power spectral density traits in Fig. 
9 strongly indicate this connection. Previously, when using 
the pick instrument, such direct comparison did not yield 
reliable results, especially during trials in biological 
phantoms such as chick embryos, due to slippage between 
the tool and the tissue [20]. Furthermore, with the new 
forceps tip, the user can accomplish the peeling task in a 
single attempt, whereas a pick instrument could necessitate 
multiple attempts due to associated challenges in tissue 
manipulation. This is not only important for ease of use, but 
also significantly increases safety, since multiple 
delamination attempts intensify the risk of retinal damage. 
 
Figure 10.  Frequency analysis on tip position and peeling forces. Highly 
correlated spectral density traits due to strong grasping provided by forceps 
use: a peak at 9 Hz due to physiological hand tremor and a 60-95% 
reduction in 2-20 Hz oscillations in both tip force and position spectra. 
1403
  
VI. CONCLUSION 
This paper presents an integrated assistive system for 
membrane peeling that combines an active tremor-canceling 
handheld micromanipulator, Micron, with a force-sensing 
motorized micro-forceps. Our system addresses two of the 
most critical requirements of vitreoretinal surgery: tremor-
free tool motion and limitation of applied forces. 
In this study, we first developed a compact, lightweight, 
force-sensing micro-forceps module with an intuitive handle 
mechanism. The tip was motorized so that there is no 
mechanical coupling required between the handle 
mechanism and the forceps tip. Three FBGs were 
incorporated onto the tip module to provide 2-DOF force 
sensing capability with a resolution of 0.3 mN. In order to 
form a complete system, the module was integrated onto 
Micron. Membrane peeling tests were performed on a 
bandage phantom to monitor performance and identify any 
advantages or disadvantages regarding the integration. 
Analyses revealed no adverse effect upon Micron's 
performance due to the added inertia of the forceps module. 
Compared to a pick instrument, the micro-forceps provided 
an easier and safer operation by facilitating better tissue 
manipulation and enabling peeling to be accomplished in a 
single attempt. In addition, the slippage problem in pick 
usage was eliminated. Consequently the measured tool-to-
tissue forces and tool-tip dynamics were more highly 
correlated. 
The forceps tip used in this work is modified from a 
disposable tool. For this reason, the tip fails after a limited 
number of actuation cycles. We currently are following two 
different paths in parallel to solve this issue. The first 
solution is to modify the design so that the disposable jaws 
can easily be replaced with new ones. The second approach 
is to design permanent forceps jaws by eliminating the 
friction and wear in the current design. This would also 
allow for more accurate modeling and estimation of inner 
actuation forces, and consequently increased accuracy in 
force sensing. Upon developing a system that can endure 
prolonged use, we aim to extend our results through 
multiple-subject experiments. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors thank Prof. Cameron Riviere and his team at 
Carnegie Mellon University for providing the Micron robot, 
Alcon, Inc. (Fort Worth, TX) for their help with providing 
the micro-forceps tools, and Tom Guidarelli from New Scale 
Technologies, Inc. for assistance in hardware 
implementation. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Gupta, P. Jensen, and E. de Juan, “Surgical forces and tactile 
perception during retinal microsurgery,” in Proc. MICCAI’99, 1999, 
pp. 1218–1225. 
[2] R. N. Sjaarda, B. M. Glaser, J. T. Thompson, R. P. Murphy, and A. 
Hanham, “Distribution of iatrogenic retinal breaks in macular hole 
surgery,” Ophthalmology, vol. 102:9, pp. 1387-1392, Sep. 1995. 
[3] K. Nakata, M. Ohji, Y. Ikuno, S. Kusaka, F. Gomi, and Y. Tano, 
“Sub-retinal hemorrhage during internal limiting membrane peeling 
for a macular hole,” Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol, vol. 241, pp. 
582-584, Jul. 2003. 
[4] P. S. Schenker, E. C. Barlow, C. D. Boswell, H. Das, S. Lee, T. R. 
Ohm, E. D. Paljug, G. Rodriguez, and S. T. Charles, “Development of 
a telemanipulator for dexterity enhanced microsurgery,” in Proc. 2nd 
Int Symp Med Rob Comput Asst Surg, 1995, pp. 81-88. 
[5] I. W. Hunter, L. A. Jones, M. A. Sagar, S. R. Lafontaine, and P. J. 
Hunter, “Opthalmic microsurgical robot and associ ated virtual 
environment,” Comput Biol Med, vol. 25:2, pp. 173-182, Mar. 1995. 
[6] T. Ueta, Y. Yamaguchi, Y. Shirakawa, T. Nakano, R. Ideta, Y. Noda , 
A. Morita, R. Mochizuki, N. Sugita, M. Mituishi, and Y. Tamaki, 
“Robot-assisted vitreoretinal surgery: Development of a prototype and 
feasibility studies in an animal model,” Ophthalmology, vol. 116:8, 
pp. 1538-1543, Aug. 2009. 
[7] H. Das, H. Zak, J. Johnson, J. Crouch, and D. Frambach, “Evaluation 
of a telerobotic system to assist surgeons in microsurgery,” Comput 
Aided Surg ,vol. 4:1, pp. 15-25, 1999. 
[8] P.S. Jensen, K. W. Grace, R. Attariwala, J. E. Colgate, and M. R. 
Glucksberg, “Toward robot -assisted vascular microsurgery in the 
retina,” Graefes Arch Clin Exp Ophthalmol, vol. 235:11, pp. 696-
701, Nov. 1997. 
[9] A. P. Mulgaonkar, J. P. Hubschman, J. L. Bourges , B. L. Jordan, C. 
Cham, J. T. Wilson, T. C. Tsao, and M. O. Culjat, “A prototype 
surgical manipulator for robotic intraocular micro surgery,” Stud 
Health Technol Inform, vol. 142, pp. 215-217, 2009. 
[10] A. Uneri, M. A. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, and I. 
Iordachita, “New steady -hand Eye Robot with micro-force sensing for 
vitreoretinal surgery,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE RAS EMBS Int Conf Biomed 
Robot Biomechatron (BioRob), 2010, pp.814-819. 
[11] R. A. MacLachlan, B. C.  ecker, J. Cuevas Tabar s, G. W. Podnar,  . 
A.  obes, and C. N. Riviere, “Micron: an actively stabilized handheld 
tool for microsurgery,” IEEE Trans Robot, vol.28:1, pp.195-212, Feb. 
2012. 
[12] Z. Sun, M. Balicki, J. Kang, J. Handa, R. Taylor, and I. Iordachita, 
“Development and preliminary data of novel integrated optical micro -
force sensing tools for retinal microsurgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA ’09), 2009, pp. 1897 –1902. 
[13] I. Iordachita, Z. Sun, M. Balicki, J. Kang, S. Phee, J. Handa, P. 
Gehlbach, and R. Taylor, “A sub -millimetric, 0.25 mn resolution fully 
integrated fiber-optic force-sensing tool for retinal microsurgery,” 
International Journal of Computer Assisted Radiology and Surgery, 
vol. 4, pp. 383–390, 2009. 
[14] M. Balicki, A. Uneri, I. Iordachita, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, and R. 
Taylor, “Micro -force Sensing in Robot Assisted Membrane Peeling 
for Vitreoretinal Surgery,” Med Image Comput Comput Assist Interv., 
vol. 13, pp. 303–310, 2010. 
[15] B. Gonenc, M. A. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, C. N. Riviere, R. H. 
Taylor, and I. Iordachita, “Preliminary Evaluation of a Micro-Force 
Sensing Handheld Robot for Vitreoretinal Surgery, ” in Proc. IEEE 
Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS ’12), 2012, 
pp.4125-4130. 
[16] S. Charles, “Techniques and tools for dissection of epiretinal 
membranes,” Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental 
Ophthalmology, vol. 241:5, pp. 347-352, 2003. 
[17] X. He, M. A. Balicki, J. U. Kang, P. L. Gehlbach, J. T. Handa, R. H. 
Taylor, and I. I. Iordachita, “Force sensing micro-forceps with 
integrated fiber bragg grating for vitreoretinal surgery,” in Proc. of 
SPIE, vol. 8218, pp. 82180W 1-7, Feb. 2012. 
[18] I. Kuru, B. Gonenc, M. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, 
and I. Iordachita, “Force Sensing Micro-Forceps for Robot Assisted 
Retinal Surgery,” in Proc. International Conference of the IEEE 
EMBS (EMBC ’12), 2012, pp. 1401-1404. 
[19] B. Gonenc, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, and I. Iordachita, 
“Design of 3-DOF Force Sensing Micro-Forceps for Robot Assisted 
Vitreoretinal Surgery,” in Proc. International Conference of the IEEE 
EMBS (EMBC ’13), 2013, pp. 5686-5689. 
[20] B. Gonenc, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, and I. Iordachita, “A 
Comparative Study for Robot Assisted Vitreoretinal Surgery: Micron 
vs. the Steady-Hand Robot,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics 
and Automation (ICRA ’13), 2013, pp. 4832-4837. 
[21] R. N. Stiles, “Mechanical and neural feedback factors in postural 
hand tremor of normal subjects,” J. Neurophysiol., vol. 44, pp. 40-59, 
Jul. 1980. 
1404
