Three-Dimensional Robotic Manipulation and Transport of Micro-Scale
Objects by a Magnetically Driven Capillary Micro-Gripper
Joshua Giltinan, Eric Diller, Cagil Mayda, and Metin Sitti
Abstract— One major challenge for untethered micro-scale
mobile robotics is the manipulation of external objects in
the robot’s three-dimensional (3D) work environment. Here,
we present a method to use the capillary force at a solid-
liquid-gas interface to reversibly attach objects to a mobile
magnetic microrobot. This is accomplished by the addition
of a cavity in the hydrophobic microrobot, in which an air
bubble is captured when the microrobot is placed in a water
environment. The extension of the air bubble from the cavity
is adjusted dynamically by controlling the pressure of the
workspace environment. A peak switching ratio between the
maximum and minimum gripping forces of 14:1 is shown for
controlled attachment/detachment experiments, which allows
for reliable pick-and-place operation. This work introduces an
analytical capillary adhesion model and demonstrates control of
the bubble size for pick-and-place gripping. A proof-of-concept
demonstration of 3D manipulation in a ﬂuidic environment
shows the potential of capillary gripping for future use in
conﬁned environments such as inside microﬂuidic devices for
transportation or assembly of hydrophobic objects.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, great strides have been made in power
delivery and control of untethered micro-scale robotics. The
current designs in literature, including electrostatic [1], elec-
tromagnetic [2], thermal [3], and bacteria-propelled systems
[4], [5], have demonstrated wireless motion control of indi-
vidual and groups of mobile microrobots. A major challenge
for microrobots is the manipulation of sub-millimeter size
objects, which is envisioned to be critical for micro-assembly
tasks and minimally-invasive surgery [6].
Magnetic microrobots are of particular interest to re-
searchers as magnetic ﬁelds can be used for remote actuation
at long range and are capable of applying relatively large
forces and torques. Actuation has been demonstrated in a
variety of environments, including liquid and air, and ﬂuid-
based actuation has been demonstrated in both 2D and 3D
[7].
Previously, researchers have shown manipulation of micro-
objects in 2D using contact and non-contact ﬂuid-based ma-
nipulation, with control methods that work well constrained
to a planar surface, yet yield some difﬁculty in 3D [8], [9],
[10]. Tottori et al. showed the 3D manipulation of 6 m
diameter microparticles by 35m long magnetic microrobots
which swim with a helical ﬂagellum and use a cup to hold
the micro-object [11]. Kwon et al. demonstrated the use of
an ultrasonic transducer to control the oscillation of an air
bubble attached to a microrobot in a ﬂuid medium. The oscil-
J. Giltinan, E. Diller, and M. Sitti* are with the Department of Mechanical
Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. E.
Diller is now with the Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering,
University of Toronto, Toronto, M5S3G8, Canada. C. Mayda is with
the Department of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Sabanci University,
Istanbul 34956, Turkey.

sitti@cmu.edu
lation of the air bubble near the bubble’s resonant frequency
induced ﬂuid ﬂow used to trap objects, and the generated
force had a measured output of 50 nN [12]. As these works
either constrain the geometry of the object or have a low
actuating force to weight ratio, the untethered pick-and-place
manipulation of small objects in 3D with arbitrary geometries
remains an unsolved challenge in microrobotics.
Tethered gripping of micro scale objects has been well
studied. In air, MEMS- and vacuum-based grippers have
been shown to reliably and precisely pick-and-place objects
[13]. Water as an operating environment is of particular
interest for medical applications as many biological ﬂuids
are comprised of water, and retain similar ﬂuid properties.
In water, L´ opez-Walle et al. use a Peltier element to cool
a tethered end-effector, creating ice in the water. This ice
traps micro-objects, and the end-effector is able to melt the
ice to release the object after manipulation [14]. However,
tethered methods such as these cannot be easily converted
into micro-scale mobile systems.
Capillary and surface forces have been demonstrated
for the manipulation of micro-scale objects with minimal
damage and with a high level of controllability. Many of
these works use water as the bridging medium and operate
in air [15]. A capillary gripper could take advantage of
hydrophobic interactions and would not be dependent on the
microrobot resting on a surface, being advantageous for 3D
motion.
This work introduces a capillary gripping mechanism to
previously-developed magnetic micro-robots capable of 5-
DOF motion in ﬂuid. This method relies on surface forces
at a solid-liquid-gas interface to grab objects of an arbitrary
shape with adhesion on the order of ﬁve to ten micronewtons.
As the gripping principle is not dependent on the microrobot
motion strategy, the method presented can be used in other
microrobotic systems.
A gas bubble is attached to the microrobot, and the
bubble uses surface forces to attach to the object to be
manipulated. The volume of the trapped air bubble can be
modulated by changing the ambient pressure of the micro-
robot’s environment in a remote manner. This allows for
control of the adhesive force exerted on the object, allowing
for controllable pick-and-place gripping of arbitrarily shaped
objects. This paper presents the concept of manipulation
using a bubble, an analytical model and characterization of
attachment forces, the system used to actuate the gripping
microrobots, and a demonstration of micro-object transport
in 3D.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2077
a)
operating surface micro-object
microrobot bubble
c)
b)
d)
microrobot
air bubble
micro-object
surface
air-filled cavity
air in cavity
Fig. 1: Manipulation of a micro-sized object by a magnetic microrobot using
a capillary gripper. (a) The microrobot, with bubble extended, approaches
and attaches to the object. The dashed lines show the cross section depicting
the air cavity inside the microrobot. It is possible for the microrobot to
position itself onto the object in 2D or 3D. (b) The microrobot, attached to
the object by a capillary bridge, moves in 3D and places the object on a
surface. (c) The bubble retracts into the microrobot, breaking contact with
the object. (d) With attachment force minimized, the microrobot peels/rolls
off of the object, leaving it on the surface.
II. CAPILLARY GRIPPING CONCEPT
When a polyurethane/NdFeB composite microrobot is
placed in a water, the hydrophobic surface will capture air
bubbles due to nucleation sites that occur as a result of the
surface roughness of the polyurethane/NdFeB material [16].
A molded cavity in a microrobot will repeatably capture a
proportionally sized air bubble at a speciﬁc location. In a
water environment, hydrophobic objects will prefer to be
in contact with the air bubble in order to minimize their
surface energy. In kind, the air bubble will minimize its
surface energy by being contact with other objects. The
air bubble then acts as a capillary bridge between the
microrobot cavity and the micro-object. Through this bridge
the microrobot can exert forces on the object to move it in
the microrobot’s workspace. However, the attachment force
between the micro-object and bubble must be greater than
the attractive forces between the micro-object and the work
environment; this work assumes this is always true. The
releasing mechanism is thus a result of the bubble breaking
attachment with the micro-object. It is also assumed that the
total force attaching the bubble to the microrobot is greater
than the total force attracting the bubble to the micro-object,
thus when an external inﬂuence causes the bubble volume to
decrease, it is assumed the bubble retracts into the cavity of
the microrobot. The height of the bubble extending from the
microrobot, h, decreases until all contact with the micro-
object is broken, as shown in Fig. 1. We generalize this
condition to be h < 0, as we are unable to see small and
negative bubble heights.
The air bubble extension is manipulated by controlling the
pressure in the microrobot workspace. This is done via an
air-tight chamber in which the microrobot work environment
is placed. The internal relative pressure of the chamber,
which is monitored by a pressure gauge, is modulated by
a pump connected to the chamber by a tube. Alternative
a)
b)
?
air bubble
micro-object
r
h
R
c)
F
c
+F
w
+F
k
N+F
adh-rs
?
m
+?
d
m
microrobot
L
Fig. 2: Forces acting on a microrobot (a) Relevant dimensions and mi-
crorobot moment ~ m. (b) Measured parameters during the adhesion mea-
surement. (c) Free body diagram of the microrobot during these tests. The
adhesion, weight, and the spring force of the bubble are approximated to
act on the center of the microrobot. The normal force and adhesion between
the microrobot and substrate act on the pivot point of the microrobot.
bubble manipulation methods, such as controlling the local
temperature of the bubble volume by remote inductive mag-
netic heating, could be used to avoid the constraints of a
pressurized chamber, but are beyond the scope of this work.
A. Magnetic Forces and Torques
Magnetic forces and torques can be induced by a set
of electromagnetic coils surrounding the workspace. These
forces and torques can be used to directly move the micro-
robot in space, and has been demonstrated for 2D motion
on a surface or for 3D motion in ﬂuid environments [17]. A
magnetic microrobot experiences torques due to the magnetic
ﬁelds and forces due to the magnetic ﬁeld gradients. The
force
~
F
m
exerted on a microrobot with magnetic moment ~ m
in a magnetic ﬁeld
~
B, assuming no electric current is ﬂowing
in the workspace, is
~
F
m
= (~ mr)
~
B; (1)
and the magnetic torque ~ 
m
is given by
~ 
m
= ~ m
~
B: (2)
B. Capillary Force
When the bubble comes into contact with another surface,
surface tension and Laplace forces will attach the bubble to
the surface. The Laplace force,
~
F
p
, is due to the pressure
difference between the bubble’s internal pressure, and the
pressure of the workspace. The surface tension force,
~
F
st
,
arises from the surface tension at the interface between the
object, liquid, and bubble. Together, the Laplace and surface
tension forces are considered to be the capillary force acting
on the object.
To simplify the problem, we assume the microrobot and
object are parallel plates with an axisymmetric capillary
bridge. For two planar parallel surfaces, the capillary force
between them is
~
F
c
=
~
F
st
+
~
F
p
= 2r sin(
c
) +r
2
P; (3)
wherer is the radius of the contact circle between the object
and the bubble, 
c
is the contact angle of water on the
object surface,  is the surface tension of the solid-liquid-
gas interface (72 mN/m for water-air) and P is the pressure
drop across the bubble interface. This pressure drop is given
by Laplace’s law as
P = 2=R; (4)
2078
magnetic force, eq. (8)
force to overcome attachment forces, eq. (7)
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Applied field (mT)
Force (?N)
Fig. 3: Comparison of the applied magnetic force, eq. (8) and the magnetic
force required for detachment by peeling, eq. (7). The microrobot is
observed ﬁve times attaching to and peeling from the same surface. There
are three samples per data point for
~
B in the range 0-0.165 mT due to
the inability to conduct visual measurements in this range for two samples.
Microroobot magnetization: ~ m = 4:4Am
2
.
where R is the mean radius of curvature of the water-vapor
surface [15].
When in contact with an object, the bubble will maintain
a non-zero h above the surface. This is due to a restoring
force the bubble exerts on the microrobot, which for small
forces can be considered Hookean, and is given by
~
F
k
=k(h h
0
); (5)
whereh
0
is the bubble height in absence of an applied force.
In experiments,h is measured from the middle of the bubble
cavity directly down to the micro-object, as seen in Fig. 2.
The approximated minimum observed height, h
0
, occurs in
the absence of an applied magnetic ﬁeld, but still in the
presence of the weight of the microrobot. Attard et al. have
shown that the effective spring constant k of a bubble or
droplet experiencing a load by a small particle with radius
R
p
, can be approximated as
k = 4
 
ln
"
2R
2
0
R
p
sin
2
(
c
)
(1 + cos (
c
))
2
#
 
cos(
c
)
2 + cos(
c
)
!
 1
;
(6)
where 
 1
 10 nm is the electric double layer force of
decay length and R
0
is the unperturbed radius of curvature,
which for small forces R
0
 R [18]. Here, R
p
is approxi-
mated by the radius of contact, r.
III. ADHESION MEASUREMENTS
The gripping force of a capillary gripping microrobot is
characterized by afﬁxing a silicon substrate to the pressure
chamber surface and having the microrobot peel off by
applying a magnetic torque. First, the microrobot is oriented
to have the bubble come in contact with the ﬁxed substrate.
Then a magnetic torque is applied to peel the microrobot
from the surface, and the capillary force acts as an opposing
moment. Figure 2 shows the balance of forces and torques
acting on a microrobot used to measure the adhesion of an
attached bubble. Assuming the microrobot motion is slow,
the ﬂuid drag, 
d
, is negligible. Approximating the forces
to act on the center of the microrobot, the force required
to overcome the capillary force, bubble restoring force, and
a) b) c) d) 3.8 ± 0.1 ?N
t = 0 s
4.2 ± 0.1 ?N
t = 2.021 s
4.7 ± 0.1 ?N
t = 4.004 s
5.1 ± 0.1 ?N
   t = 6.025 s
e) f) g) 5.6 ± 0.1 ?N
t = 7.036 s
4.7 ± 0.2 ?N
t = 7.223 s
3.5 ± 0.2 ?N
t = 7.269 s
3.0  ± 0.2 ?N
   t = 7.230 s
h)
500 ?m
h
R
r
surface
Fig. 4: High speed images of a microrobot with a bubble peeling off a bare
silicon substrate. The force due to the applied magnetic torque is given for
each frame. The error given is due to a possible2

measurement error of
the microrobot angle. The time given is referenced to the initial measurement
time. An undesired bubble on the side of the microrobot facing the camera
is visible. An example of parameters found by analysis is given in a). Here,
R
2
 R
1
= 160 m, h = 85 m, and r = 80 m with a measurement
error of approximately5m. The direction of ~ m and
~
B are given in (b).
effective weight
~
F
w
, can be solved as
~
F
o
=
~
F
c
+
~
F
k
+
~
F
w
; (7)
In manipulation, the applied forces to the microrobot
should be lower than
~
F
o
in order to prevent undesired de-
tachment. The capillary and spring forces are obtained using
eqs. (3,6) by measuring r, R, and h. The measurements are
obtained by using the ImageJ software suite based on optical
images. An example measurement is shown in Fig. 4(a). The
mean bubble curvature is estimated by taking the mean of the
measured radius of curvature of the meniscus at the greatest
separation between the microrobot and the substrate and the
measured radius of curvature of the meniscus at the shortest
separation.
The force overcoming the capillary bond in this case is
the equivalent force at the bubble site due to the induced
magnetic torque, which is given by
~
F
mt
=
2
L
j~ mj



~
B


 sin; (8)
where is the angle between the microrobot and the surface,
and L is the pivot arm length of the microrobot.
Figure 3 compares the applied
~
F
mt
to
~
F
o
for an un-
retracted bubble on a ﬁxed silicon surface. A relative pressure
of approximately  24 kPa is applied to the microrobot
workspace to expand the bubble. This pressure is chosen as
the resulting large bubble size facilitates the measurement of
the capillary force parameters. The applied ﬁeld is increased
by increments of 0.03 mT every two seconds until the mi-
crorobot orients with the ﬁeld and peels the bubble from the
surface. Detachment of the microrobot occurred differently
for each iteration in the values between 0.4 and 0.53 mT, all
occurring when the applied magnetic force is greater than
the force required for detachment. This is represented by the
shaded region. To calculate eq. (7), the values ofh,R, andr
must be determined by analyzing frames of the experiment.
Measurement of of h, R, and r yields an error of5m
per variable, and in addition to stochastic variations, results
in a large overall error. Error in the applied magnetic force is
due to the measurement of the microrobot angle. This shows
that the required detachment forces are on the order of 5 to 10
2079
Fig. 5: (a-c) Fabrication of capillary gripping microrobots. The microrobots
are fabricated as in previous work [19]. (d) A thick backing layer is left so
the microrobot forms a one-sided cavity for bubble capture. (e) Eight coil
electromagnet system used for microrobot experiments. The pressure vessel
is placed in the center of the workspace and is connected to the syringe
pump which controls the pressure.
N, which are greater than the 1N the electromagnetic
coils are able to create through magnetic gradients (
~
F
m
) for
a microrobot with a magnetization of 1 Am
2
. The weight
of the microrobot and proof of concept micro-object are on
the order of 1 N, thus the attachment force to weight ratio
is approximately 10:1.
To demonstrate the bubble deformation as the microrobot
is peeled from the surface, a high speed camera (pco.dimax)
at 1000 frames per second captured the deformation of the
bubble and the resulting microrobot angle, , for an applied
ﬁeld. The ﬁeld is increased from 0.23 to 0.36 mT by 0.033
mT every two seconds, and the frame is acquired after the
microrobot reaches equilibrium, generally after one second.
The bubble curvature, R, does not change drastically until
the increasing angle of the microrobot begins to decrease
F
mt
. This is shown in Fig. 4 for an applied relative pressure
of 24 kPa.
IV. SYSTEM DESIGN AND CHARACTERIZATION
A. Magnetic and Pressure Actuation
An electromagnetic coil system is used to actuate the
microrobots remotely. The system is capable of applying
maximum magnetic ﬁelds of 27 mT and a spatial gradient
of 1 mT/mm. The magnetic coil system used is described
in detail by Diller et al. [7] and is shown, with the pressure
vessel in the workspace, in Fig. 5(e).
B. Pressure Chamber Design
The pressure chamber is made from aluminum with acrylic
viewing ports, and ﬂexible PVC tubing connects it to a 30
mL syringe. Pressure is measured by digital meter (ACSI
Model 1200). The syringe is mounted to a pump (Braintree
Sci BS-8000) for precise manipulation of the bubble height.
C. Microrobots
Permanent magnet microrobots are fabricated in a batch
process using photolithography and molding techniques sim-
ilar to Imbaby et al. [20]. Microrobots are composed of
(a)
(b)
?30 ?20 ?10 0 10
?5
0
5
10
Relative pressure (kPa)
Height change (?m/min)
0 5 10 15
50
100
150
200
Time (min)
Bubble height (?m)
0
Fig. 6: Characterization of bubble growth rate from gas diffusion from the
surrounding water. (a) Change in bubble size vs time for a stabilized relative
pressure of -24 kPa. The bubble height starts from an arbitrary 51 m
and over 15 minutes grows to 197m. (b) The rate of change of a bubble
size for the spectrum of relative pressures investigated and used for the
manipulation method. The rates are determined from data sets as illustrated
in (a) and are taken as the least squares ﬁt of the data.
neodymium-iron-boron (NdFeB) particles in a polyurethane
matrix, with fabrication details given by Diller et al. [19]. To
form an asymmetric feature, the microrobot cavity, a special
consideration is needed in the molding process. As shown
in Fig. 5(d), the cavity is formed by ﬁlling the mold with
excess material, forming a thick backing layer on the mold.
The microrobots are removed from the mold, and excess
material is trimmed before the microrobots are magnetized.
The magnetization of the microrobot is measured using an
alternating ﬁeld gradient magnetometer.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Bubble Capture and Height
A bubble is considered successfully captured when the
resulting air pocket is relatively ﬂush with the microrobot
side (h 0) at zero relative pressure. On occasion, bubbles
can be captured such that when no relative pressure is
applied, the bubble height will be greater than zero. For
ease of experiment, these microrobots are removed from
the workspace, dried, and placed in the workspace again.
Optimization of the cavity size to ensure proper bubble
capture is left as a future work.
To determine how the applied relative pressure affects the
picking force of the microrobot, the height of the bubble must
be understood and controlled. When not in contact with a
micro-object, the normal distance from the microrobot to the
highest point of the bubble is used to measure h. However,
2080
a)
b)
?10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Bubble height (?m)
Peel off force (?N)
?20 ?15 ?10 ?5 0 5 10 15 20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
Relative pressure (kPa)
Bubble height (?m)
decreasing pressure: 0 to ?17 kPa
increasing pressure: ?15 to 15 kPa
decreasing pressure: 13 kPa to 0 kPa
Fig. 7: (a) Detachment magnetic force as a function of bubble height.
The height of the bubble is modulated with pressure, with care to keep
the volume of the bubble relatively constant. The maximum observed
detachment force is 12 N while the minimum force, when the bubble
has been forced into the microrobot cavity, is 0.83 N, showing a peak
switching ratio of 14:1. The minimum peel off force is identical to the force
required to peel the microrobot from its side without a bubble. (b) Bubble
height as a function of pressure. The hysteresis effect is made negligible
by modulating the pressure quickly. The arrows indicate the direction of
pressure increasing or decreasing as a function of time, in the order of blue,
red, then green. Microrobot magnetization: ~ m = 0:511Am
2
.
gas from solution can enter or leave the bubble at positive or
negative pressures, respectively. This will also manipulate the
bubble size over time. Figure 6(b) shows initial experiments
to characterize the change of the bubble due to constantly
applied relative pressures over 15 minutes. The constant rate
of bubble size change is predicted by the literature, as the
rate of change in the bubble size becomes approximately
constant when
t& 10
r
2
b
D
; (9)
wherer
b
is the radius of the bubble andD is the diffusivity
of air into water, 2 10
 5
cm
2
/s [21]. For our bubble, this
time is on the order of ﬁve to ten seconds.
Figure 6(b) demonstrates that at larger relative pressure
magnitudes (10 kPa), a change in bubble volume will affect
the manipulation method, eg: if a large negative relative
pressure is applied to the bubble for a large time then the
detachment condition, h < 0, will require a larger positive
relative pressure. We then want to avoid working in these
regions to maintain control of the bubble volume. These
results can be used to control h such that over time a larger
bubble can be obtained to aid initial contact of the object,
a) b)
c)
microrobot
object
obstacle
500 ?m
y
z
d)
path
Fig. 8: Frames from the manipulation proof of concept. (a) The microrobot
attaches to the silicon part, and (b,c) by applying a magnetic force in the
yz-direction the microrobot is able to move over a barrier splitting the
workspace into two regions. (d) The microrobot then separates from the
micro-object using a rolling motion once the positive pressure is applied.
Video available in supplementary materials.
orh can be decreased slowly over time to control and place
the object.
As the applied relative pressure is given as the control
input, the detachment force as a function of pressure, coupled
by h, is investigated. A maximum force of 12 N and a
minimum force of 0.83 N yield a switching ratio of 14:1
as shown in Fig. 7(a). The bubble height is manipulated
with an applied pressure and the force required to peel the
microrobot is recorded. To reduce the time dependency ofh,
the results from Fig. 6 are considered. For a given negative
pressure used to increase h, a positive pressure equal to
the magnitude of the negative pressure is applied after the
peel off measurement for approximately an equal amount
of time. The maximum detachment force is observed when
h! 0. Once the modulated bubble height is such that the
bubble could not come into contact with the substrate, the
detachment force became minimized and constant.
To demonstrate controllability of the bubble height, Fig.
7(b) shows the bubble height for an applied pressure. To
eliminate hysteresis from air diffusion effects, the measure-
ment occurs over a period of ﬁve seconds. As conﬁrmation
of the lack of diffusion during this experiment, it can be seen
in Fig. 7(b) that when the pressure returns to zero, the bubble
height returns to its original value.
Experiments have shown that the pressure changes will
affect undesired bubbles in the workspace as well. These can
cause additional attachment force between the micro-object
and the working surface, greatly increasing the required
capillary force to lift the object. This adhesion will also resist
2D motion, possibly preventing any actuation of the object.
B. 3D Manipulation Experiments
The microrobot’s ability to pick-and-place an object in 3D
is demonstrated in Fig. 8. The micro-object is a planar silicon
chiplet fabricated to roughly the size of the microrobot,
500 x 500 m. An obstacle, 1 mm thick acrylic, blocks
the microrobot from placing the micro-object in the goal
region, the camera focal plane on the left side. A bubble is
seen captured on the obstacle due to surface defects. The
microrobot, with an extended bubble, is rolled on top of
2081
the object. The approximate open loop path is given by the
dashed line. The microrobot is pulled in 3D using magnetic
forces (
~
F
m
) to overcome the barrier. The microrobot lands
on its side, with the microrobot facing the camera. The
microrobot uses a rolling locomotion to move into the goal
region, and separates from the object. The microrobot then
rolls into the foreground of the focal plane.
C. Scaling
When the microrobot/micro-object system has a zero net
velocity in a ﬂuid medium and is not in contact with
a surface, it is apparent that the capillary force must be
greater than the effective weight of the micro-object, and
the magnetic force must be greater than the effective weight
of both the micro-object and microrobot. When considering
the maximum capillary force, examining eqs. (3,4) show r
should be maximized and R should be minimized, though a
greater importance is placed on maximizing r as F
c
/ r
2
and F
c
/R
 1
. This also indicates scaling of this technique
is favorable for microrobots as F
c
/ L
1
. These conditions
can be obtained by manipulating the bubble to have a short
distance between the microrobot and object and a large
contact radius. For a microrobot of a ﬁxed size, this is
facilitated by a larger cavity to magnetic volume ratio in
order to accommodate a large air bubble. The magnetic force
scales withL
3
, so the loss of magnetic volume is detrimental
to the ability to manipulate objects. However, the maximum
capillary force must be greater than the effective weight of
the micro-object; thus the optimal design will be dependent
on the speciﬁc application.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this work, we have shown the initial investigation
of a capillary gripper for an untethered mobile magnetic
microrobot. A small bubble is captured in a cavity molded
into the microrobot. The bubble volume is modulated by
an external relative pressure on the microrobot workspace.
The bubble attaches to micro-objects by capillary force, and
retraction of the bubble is used to detach the micro-object
from the microrobot. The current system and microrobots
yield a maximum switching ratio of 14:1. This manipulation
method would be useful for 3D transport and assembly of
microparts in enclosed microﬂuidic devices where external
pressure is a controlled parameter.
Placement of the object is currently accomplished by
using 2D rolling actuation to position the object before
release. This introduces inaccuracies in placement and could
possibly damage the object as it comes into contact with the
surface. Future work will focus on precision manipulation
and placement of objects in arbitrary 3D environments. It is
envisioned this method could build 3D MEMS devices or
tissue-engineered structures [6].
Microrobots of dimensions 500 500 100 m with
cavities of 100 m radius are investigated in this work.
Future work entails investigating the optimization of a mi-
crorobot for a speciﬁc task. Other detachment mechanisms
could be developed to cause the bubble to detach from
the micro-object without the bubble fully retracting. While
planar micro-objects and substrates have been investigated,
the method could be generalized to non-planar objects.
REFERENCES
[1] B. R. Donald, C. G. Levey, C. D. McGray, I. Paprotny, and D. Rus,
“An untethered, electrostatic, globally controllable mems micro-robot,”
Journal of Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–15,
2006.
[2] D. R. Frutiger, K. V ollmers, B. E. Kratochvil, and B. J. Nelson, “Small,
fast, and under control: Wireless resonant magnetic micro-agents,”
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 613–
636, 2009.
[3] O. Sul, M. Falvo, R. Taylor, S. Washburn, and R. Superﬁne, “Ther-
mally actuated untethered impact-driven locomotive microdevices,”
Applied Physics Letters, vol. 89, p. 203512, 2006.
[4] S. Martel, M. Mohammadi, O. Felfoul, Z. Lu, and P. Poupon-
neau, “Flagellated magnetotactic bacteria as controlled MRI-trackable
propulsion and steering systems for medical nanorobots operating
in the human microvasculature,” International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 28, no. 571-582, 2009.
[5] B. Behkam and M. Sitti, “Bacterial ﬂagella-based propulsion and
on/off motion control of microscale objects,” Applied Physics Letters,
vol. 90, p. 023902, 2007.
[6] S. Tasoglu, E. Diller, S. Guven, M. Sitti, and U. Demirci, “Untethered
micro-robotic coding of three-dimensional material composition,” Na-
ture Communications, vol. 5, no. 3124, DOI: 10.1038/ncomms4124,
2014.
[7] E. Diller, J. Giltinan, and M. Sitti, “Independent control of multiple
magnetic microrobots in three dimensions,” International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 614–631, 2013.
[8] C. Pawashe, S. Floyd, E. Diller, and M. Sitti, “Two-dimensional
autonomous microparticle manipulation strategies for magnetic mi-
crorobots in ﬂuidic environments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 467–477, 2012.
[9] Z. Ye, E. Diller, and M. Sitti, “Micro-manipulation using rotational
ﬂuid ﬂows induced by remote magnetic micro-manipulators,” Journal
of Applied Physics, vol. 112, no. 6, p. 064912, 2012.
[10] W. Hu, K. S. Ishii, and A. T. Ohta, “Micro-assembly using optically
controlled bubble microrobots,”AppliedPhysicsLetters, vol. 99, no. 9,
pp. 094103–094103, 2011.
[11] S. Tottori, L. Zhang, F. Qiu, K. K. Krawczyk, A. Franco-Obreg´ on, and
B. J. Nelson, “Magnetic helical micromachines: fabrication, controlled
swimming, and cargo transport.,” Advanced Materials, vol. 24, no. 6,
pp. 811–6, 2012.
[12] J. O. Kwon, J. S. Yang, and S. Chung, “Untethered microrobot actuated
by an electromagnetic ﬁeld with an acoustically oscillating bubble for
bio/micro-object manipulation,” in Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and
Microsystems Conference, pp. 282–285, 2011.
[13] D. O. Popa and H. E. Stephanou, “Micro and mesoscale robotic
assembly,” Journal of Manufacturing Processes, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 52–
71, 2004.
[14] B. L´ opez-Walle, M. Gauthier, and N. Chaillet, “Principle of a sub-
merged freeze gripper for microassembly,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 897–902, 2008.
[15] P. Lambert, Capillary forces in microassembly: modeling, simulation,
experiments, and case study. Springer, 2007.
[16] A. A. Atchley and A. Prosperetti, “The crevice model of bubble
nucleation,” Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, vol. 86,
p. 1065, 1989.
[17] M. Kummer, J. Abbott, B. Kratochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul, and
B. Nelson, “Octomag: An electromagnetic system for 5-DOF wireless
micromanipulation,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26, no. 6,
pp. 1006–1017, 2010.
[18] P. Attard and S. J. Miklavcic, “Effective spring constant of bubbles
and droplets,” Langmuir, vol. 17, no. 26, pp. 8217–8223, 2001.
[19] E. Diller, C. Pawashe, S. Floyd, and M. Sitti, “Assembly and dis-
assembly of magnetic mobile micro-robots towards deterministic 2-
D reconﬁgurable micro-systems,” International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 30, no. 14, pp. 1667–1680, 2011.
[20] M. Imbaby, K. Jiang, and I. Chang, “Net shape fabrication of stainless-
steel micro machine components from metallic powder,” Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 18, no. 11, p. 115018,
2008.
[21] P. Epstein and M. Plesset, “On the stability of gas bubbles in liquid-gas
solutions,” Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 18, p. 1505, 1950.
2082
