  
? 
Abstract— This paper presents a novel technique for 
estimating stiffness distribution of a soft tissue using a 
prototype of air-float stiffness probe. The air-float stiffness 
probe uses an indentation technique to estimate tissue stiffness. 
It consists of a spherical indenter and an indentation depth 
sensing mechanism that operates under a supply of compressed 
air. The probe has the ability to estimate tissue stiffness in non-
planner tissue profiles. A novel technique to estimate 
indentation force, using supply air pressure is described and 
validated using both experimental procedures and finite 
element analysis (FEA) techniques. FEA package, ANSYS CFX 
was used for analyzing in 2D the solid-fluid interactions within 
the probe to estimate force available at the indenter at different 
supply air pressure settings. Both the experimental results and 
numerical simulations suggest that there is a very strong linear 
correlation between the indentation force and the supply air 
pressure. This relationship is used to estimate the indentation 
force in real time during an indentation test. Verification tests 
carried out on simulated silicon samples showed that the probe 
is capable of estimating tissue stiffness values with high 
accuracy and repeatability.    
I. INTRODUCTION 
The change in stiffness is recognized as one of the most 
important parameters in differentiating malignant tumors 
from healthy tissues as many pathological changes are 
associated with stiffness change. According to Krouskop et al 
[1], stiffness of tumors can be up to several times higher than 
the stiffness of surrounding healthy tissues. In an open 
surgery with direct access to the surgical field, the surgeon 
has the option to palpate organs to identify and locate tumors. 
However, in advanced surgical techniques such as minimally 
invasive surgery (MIS), due to lack of tactile and force 
feedback, surgeons have to rely on other techniques for soft 
tissues characterization. A number of attempts to develop 
tactile and force sensors for MIS, to assess soft tissue 
characteristics have been reported in the literature [2]-[11]. 
 
The work described in this paper was funded by the European 
Commission’s Seventh Framework Programme under grant agreement 
287728 in the framework of EU project STIFF-FLOP. 
I.B. Wanninayake is with King's College London, Department of 
Informatics, The Strand, London, U.K. WC2R 2LS and also with Kingston 
University London, SW15 3DW, London, U.K. (e-mail: 
w.wanninayake@kingston.ac.uk) 
L.D. Seneviratne is with King's College London, Department of 
Informatics, The Strand, London, U.K., WC2R 2LS, (e-maill: 
lakmal.seneviratne@kcl.ac.uk), and also with the College of Engineering, 
Khalifa University of Science, Technology and Research, Abu Dhabi, 
U.A.E. (e-mail: lakmal.seneviratne@kustar.ac.ae). 
K. Althoefer is with King's College London, Department of Informatics, 
The Strand, London, U.K. WC2R 2LS L,  (e-mail: k.althoefer@kcl.ac.uk). 
 
 
Fig. 1. (a) Longitudinal section of the air-float palpation probe indicating 
the location of fiber optic displacement sensors,           
 
, (b) Top view 
of the stiffness probe indicating probe dimensions.  
 
Uribe et al. [2] have developed a piezoelectric bimorph to 
extract soft tissue characteristics. The system operates on an 
AC voltage supply and once supplied bimorph at near 
resonant frequency. When in contact with the tissue, the shift 
in frequency and the amplitude is used to differentiate 
various tissue properties. In [9], a finger like probe with 
tactile sensors made out of piezoelectric polymer films is 
used to characterize tissue properties.  The tactile sensor 
reported in [10] can predict the stiffness of the object in 
contact irrespective of the geometry and the thickness of the 
object.  
In [11]  Ottensmeyer et al. use an indentation technique, a 
12mm cannula with an indenter to acquire visco-elastic 
properties of soft tissues. Here, the force and indentation 
depth relationship is evaluated using a force sensor and a 
LVDT (Linear Variable Differential Transformer) position 
sensor. However, the LVDT used here measure only the 
extension of the indenter and not the actual indentation depth. 
Hence the accuracy of the stiffness calculation cannot be 
guaranteed unless the probe is held normal to the tissue 
surface at a predefined distance. In order to use an 
indentation technique to evaluate elastic modulus of a tissue, 
it is essential that both absolute indentation depth and the 
component of the tissue reaction force, which is the force 
normal to the tissue surface, are measured. Here, the absolute 
indentation depth is the distance measured from the tip of the 
indenter to the tissue surface along the normal. 
Estimation of Tissue Stiffness using a Prototype of Air-float Stiffness 
Probe 
Indika B. Wanninayake, Lakmal D. Seneviratne, Member, IEEE, and Kaspar Althoefer, Member, 
IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 Crown 1426
  
 
 
Fig. 2. Behavior of the surface profile sensors (    ) and forces acting on 
the upper wall of the. 
 
One of most commonly used method to estimate absolute 
indentation depth is by using a depth-sensing camera that 
assesses the local deformability of the tissue. According to 
Johnson et al. [12], due to the high local deformability of soft 
tissues, indentation contours rise to the tissue surface 
following an exponential curve. Tactile sensors reported in 
[13]-[15] use information obtained through a structured-light 
camera and a force sensor to assess elasticity parameters of 
deformable objects. However, the main disadvantage of this 
technique is that the manipulator used to deform the tissue 
may occlude the parts of the deformed objects limiting 
accuracy of the output. In [18], Liu et al. suggest a new 
approach to identify tissue surface profile variations. This 
system uses four optical-fiber displacement-sensing elements, 
each with a cylindrical rod that slides over the tissue surface 
to track the tissue deformation. Although this method can 
estimate indentation depth in real time, the sliding rods are 
designed to be extended outward by gravity, hence the 
system works only when the tool is held vertically. In view of 
the limitations associated with the above-mentioned 
techniques, a new approach for estimating tissue elastic 
properties is proposed in this paper. Initial research leading to 
the design of this probe was presented in [16]. Work 
described in this paper extends the capability of the probe 
further by incorporating stiffness computations to aid tissue 
characterization. A number of tests have been carried out 
using simulated soft tissues to evaluate and verify the ability 
of the probe to estimate tissue stiffness accurately. 
II. DEVELOPMENT OF THE AIR-FLOAT STIFFNESS PROBE 
A. Design of the probe 
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the air-float stiffness probe has a 
hollow cylindrical body with one of its ends connected to a 
pressurized air supply. At the tip of the probe there are four 
displacement sensing elements, a spherical indenter ( 
 
) at 
the center and three surface profile sensors (     
   
 
    
 
        
 
) arranged in a circle at 120° each other 
surrounding the indenter. Displacement of each sensing 
element is measured optically using a pair of optical fibers 
above each sensing element. The indenter  
 
 is free to rotate 
while all the four sensing elements can move axially, parallel 
to the probe axis. These sensing elements are mounted inside 
the probe in such a way that, during an indentation test as the 
probe moves over the tissue, the indenter  
 
 indents the tissue 
and roll over it while the three      follow the tissue 
curvature. The two circular channels towards the tip of the 
probe (     ) delivers air to     . The three      are 
designed and mounted within the probe in such a way that 
they can deliver and discharge air out at the tip. As illustrated 
in Fig. 2, when the probe is pressurized, the differential 
pressure on the upper wall of each     move it outward until 
a contact is made. Once the contact is established, air-cushion 
at the tip of     keeps it floating just above the tissue 
surface. This ensures continuous tracking of the tissue 
surface. The three      generates a datum line for the 
measurements made by  
 
 to calculate the absolute 
indentation depth. The prototype was built using a 3D rapid 
prototyping machine (ProJetTM HD 3000 Plus), which has a 
minimum layer resolution of 16?m. Digital fiber optic 
amplifier FS-N10MN, Keyence Corporation is used in the 
optical detection circuit. Calibration results for the four 
displacement sensors are given in Fig. 3. 
B. Indentation depth estimation 
As illustrated in Fig. 4, the indentation depth measuring 
system is defined in the Cartesian coordinate system with the 
origin ‘O’ at the center of the probe face.  The  -  plane is 
chosen to coincide with the end face of the probe while  -
axis is coinciding with the central axis of the probe. The 
radius of the indenter  
 
 is   . As the  
 
 indents the tissue 
sample, three    s follow the tissue profile around the  
 
 to 
generate plane  
 
 
 
 
 
, approximating the tissue profile 
underneath the probe.  
 
                           (a)                                                 (b)         
Fig. 3. Calibration results for (a) the indenter (  
 
) and (b) the three surface 
profile sensors (    
 
    
 
     
  
)  
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Modeling the indentation depth and the orientation of the probe with 
respect to the tissue surface, coordinates of the three surface profile sensor 
tips are   
 
(     
 
)    
 
( 
 √ 
 
  
 
 
  
 
) and   
 
(
 √ 
 
  
 
 
  
 
). 
1427
  
 
Then, the normal distance from the deepest indentation point 
of  
 
 to the plane  
 
 
 
 
 
, can be used to establish an 
equation for absolute indentation depth  
  
 and that is 
 
  
    
 
 (   
 
)      
 
.  (1) 
 
Here,  
 
 is the normal distance from the probe face to the 
tissue plane and can be written as 
  
 
  
 ( 
 
  
 
  
 
)
√ (( 
 
  
 
)
 
 ( 
 
  
 
)
 
 ( 
 
  
 
)
 
)   
 
)
.  (2) 
 
The angle  
 
 can be written as,  
  
 
     
  
(
  
√ (( 
 
  
 
)
 
 ( 
 
  
 
)
 
 ( 
 
  
 
)
 
)   
 
)
). (3) 
 
Here,  
 
  
 
  
 
      
 
 are the extensions of each    s 
(   
 
    
 
        
 
) and  
 
from the face of the probe. 
The full derivation of (1), (2) and (3) is given in [16]. 
 
III. ESTIMATING INDENTATION FORCE FROM SUPPLY AIR 
PRESSURE 
A. Computational model: Fluid force acting on the indenter 
A two dimensional (2D) axisymmetric computational 
model was developed to simulate the behavior of the air-float 
probe and to establish a relationship between indentation 
force and the supply air pressure. ANSYS CFX, a 
commercial computation fluid dynamic (CFD) package was 
used for this study. The size of the computational domain, 
physical arrangement, mesh, and the boundary conditions are 
illustrated in Fig. 5. Inner wall diameter of the probe was 
8mm and simulations were done for two different indenter 
sizes (7mm and 7.6mm diameter) to evaluate fluid force 
acting on the indenter under different wall clearance values. 
In order to simplify the computational model, it was assumed 
that the flow at the inlet of the probe is laminar with 
turbulence intensity below 5%.  Further, aerodynamic forces 
induced due to the rotation of the spherical indenter is 
ignored and it was assumed that there is no swirl in the flow. 
A series of simulations were carried out for six different 
indenter positions along the probe axis and at each position, 
the same simulation was repeated for at least three inlet 
velocity settings (from 1m/s to 7m/s). Three user define 
functions were used to compute force on the indenter and the 
area weighted average of pressure at the inlet and at the 
indenter.  
Fig. 6 shows the variation of the force on the spherical 
indenter for different inlet pressure values. It is quite clear 
from this simulation result that the relationship between the 
pressure and indentation force is linear.  As we modify the 
clearance between the indenter and probe inner wall, gradient 
of the force-inlet pressure curve changes, however linear 
relationship remains. Although this is a non-linear 
relationship, indentation force follows the pressure variation 
inside the probe (see Fig. 7). Hence the indentation force at 
any point can be predicted given that air pressure at the inlet 
is known.  
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
 
Fig. 5. (a). Schematic of the computational domain and the pressure 
distribution of the probe at inlet speed 1m/s. Boundary conditions are given 
in (b), Domain size (width=500mm, height = 100mm) 
 
 
 
Fig. 6. Relationship between Inlet air pressure and force (on 2D spherical 
element), RMSE (root-mean-square error) for 0.5mm and 0.2mm clearance 
values were 0.29 and 0.23 respectively  
 
 
 
Fig. 7. Relationship between Indentation force and the displacement of the 
indenter. 
1428
  
B. Experimental Verification 
The relationship predicted above, between indentation 
force ( 
 
) and inlet air pressure ( 
 
), was validated using an 
experimental procedure.  In this, the probe was pressed 
against a ATI Mini 40 force sensor rigidly mounted to a 
workbench. The air-float probe was attached to a robotic 
manipulator for accurate motion control and the probe was 
connected to a compressed air supply. The supply air 
pressure was adjusted to 30KPa using an electrically 
controlled pressure regulator. The experimental setup is 
shown in Fig. 8. During calibration; the robot arm was slowly 
advanced towards and retrieved from the Mini40. As the 
probe moves, force information from the ATI Mini 40 and air 
pressure oscillations from the pressure sensor integrated to 
the pressure regulator were collected using a DAQ (data 
acquisition) card NI PCI 6013 and DAQ module USB6211 
respectively. Experiment was repeated for ten advancing and 
retrieval cycles to evaluate the repeatability of data. 
Fig. 9 shows the variation of force ( 
 
) and pressure 
inside the probe ( 
 
) with respect to the indenter 
displacement. The combined  
 
- 
 
 relationship is shown in 
Fig. 10. It is clear from Fig. 10 that there is a linear 
correlation between the supply air pressure and the 
indentation force (see (4)). Although there is some hysteresis 
between the advancing and retrieving cycles in both  
 
 and  
 
 
curves, the linear relationship predicts the indentation force 
with an RMSE less than 0.0404.  
 
 
Fig. 8. Schematic of the experimental setup. 
 
 
                           
Fig. 9. Relationship between (a). Inlet air pressure and (b). Indentation force 
with respect to the displacement of the indenter, Pressure and force 
variation during advance and retrieval are marked as  P-ADV, P-RET, F-
ADV and F-RET respectively.  
 
 
Fig. 10. Relationship between indentation force and inlet air pressure. The 
blue dots represent the experimental data, while the red solid line represents 
the fitted curve.  
 
 
 
=     
 
       (4) 
 
IV. ESTIMATING STIFFNESS FROM THE INDENTATION FORCE 
AND INDENTATION DEPTH  
The nature of the stress-strain relationship for any 
indentation test depends on number of factors including the 
shape and size of the indenter and viscoelastic properties of 
the material under investigation. For spherical indenters, this 
relationship is nonlinear as the contact area changes with the 
indentation depth. According to [17], the change in contact 
area ( ) with the indentation depth can be estimated using 
  √  
  
 . (5) 
 
Non-linearity is significant in materials such as soft tissue 
due to their high water content.  However, at lower 
indentation depths, this relationship can successfully be 
approximated by a linear elastic model [18]. The choice of 
the linear elastic model depends mainly on the thickness and 
geometry of the tissue sample. A model such as Hertzian 
contact equation (see (6)) [18], 
  
  
 
(   
 
)
  
  
√  
  
 ,      (6)  
 
can accurately represent stress-strain relationship if thickness 
of the tissue sample is large compared to the diameter of the 
indenter [21]. Here,   and   are the Young’s modulus and 
the Poisson ratio of the tissue sample respectively. For 
incompressible materials such as soft tissues,   could be 
approximated to 0.5 [20]. However, to estimate stiffness of  
tissue samples with lower thickness ( )-radius ratios (
 
 
⁄ < 
10), an elastic model corrected for tissue sample thickness 
(see (7)) should be used to estimate tissue elasticity 
accurately [21].   
  
  
 
(   
 
)
  
  
√  
  
(               
 
       
 
        
 
)
.  (7) 
 
here,  
 
   
√  
  
 
.  
 
1429
  
 
Fig. 11. (a). Tissue reaction force against the indentation depth for two test 
locations in each of 28KPa and 10.8KPa tissue samples.(b).  Estimated 
elastic module for each of the test location estimated using (7), (8) and (9). 
 
All the validation experiments presented in this paper 
were carried out with simulated tissue sample with lower 
 
 
⁄ 
ratios. Hence the stiffness of each sample was estimated 
using (7). However, for verification purposes, experimental 
data was tested against a commonly used nonlinear elastic 
model (Fung model (8)). As suggested by Lin et al [17], this 
model can be used to provide best fits of data for both 
biological tissues and synthetic gels.  
  
    
  (   
 
)
(
 
 
     
 
    
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
      
 
)   [ (
 
 
     
 
   
 
      
 
)] (8) 
 
To investigate the applicability of the above contact 
equations to model the air-float palpation probe, a series of 
indentation tests were carried out on two simulated silicon 
tissue samples made from RTV6166 gel. Stiffness of each of 
the sample was 26.4±4KPa and 10.8±2.8KPa. During the 
experiment the air-float probe was positioned onto each 
silicone phantom leaving a clearance of 1mm between the 
probe face and the tissue surface. Then the supply air 
pressure was increased from zero at a constant rate using the 
electrically controlled pressure regulator (ECP) until the 
maximum indentation depth is reached (3mm). During the 
process, variation of both the indentation depth and the air 
pressure inside the probe was monitored.  The experiment 
was conducted at four different locations for each silicon 
sample and at each location the same test was repeated three 
times. After each test, the pressure variation inside the probe 
was used to compute the indentation force. Fig. 11 (a) shows 
the variation of the computed indentation force with the 
indenter displacement for two different test locations in each 
simulated tissue sample. Elastic modulus at each test point 
was computed using (6), (7) and (8). Thickens of the tissue 
sample was 20mm (
 
 
⁄  )  The results are given in Fig. 11 
(b). It is clear from Fig. 11 (b) that both (7) and (8) gives very 
similar estimates for elastic modulus while (6) overestimates 
it. Average stiffness of the two tissue samples estimated 
using (7) were 25±5KPa and 10.±4KPa. 
Further, in order to verify the ability of the probe to 
measure tissue stiffness while moving over the tissue surface, 
a series of tests were carried out on a simulated silicon 
phantom containing four embedded tumors.  The silicon 
phantom has a square base and a convex upper surface 
profile. The profile height varied along the  -axis of the 
tissue: the thickness is 4 mm at the center and it reduces to 2 
mm towards the edges. Stiffness of the silicone phantom was 
26.4KPa and tumors were up to six times stiffer than the 
surrounding tissue. Tumors were embedded 2mm below the 
tissue surface. Size and the tumor-tissue stiffness ratio for 
each tumor are given in Fig. 12. During the indentation test, 
the probe is held vertically and the scanning was performed 
horizontally (i.e. parallel to the  -axis) with aid of a robotic 
manipulator (Fanuc M6iB). The robot paths were deliberately 
chosen to not follow the curved surface of the phantom in 
order to effectively explore the sensor skill on coping with 
irregular surfaces. Results are shown in Fig. 12. It is clear 
from Fig. 12 that the probe produces a fairly constant 
stiffness map for the healthy area of the tissue and it has not 
respond to the tissue curvature. Tumors are indicated as high 
stiffness regions and all the four tumors are clearly visible on 
the map. Hence this probe can be used to identify the 
presence and location of the tumors through the generation of 
a tissue stiffness map even for non-planer tissue profiles. 
However, tumors on the stiffness map become less clear as 
tumor-tissue stiffness ratio decreases and tumor size 
decreases.   
 
    
Fig. 12. the stiffness map for the silicone phantom with curved upper 
surface.  
V. CONCLUSION 
A novel technique for estimating the stiffness distribution 
of soft tissues using an air-float stiffness probe have been 
described and discussed. The probe employs an indentation 
depth sensing mechanism that can be used to estimate 
absolute indentation depth. Hence the probe has the ability to 
estimate tissue stiffness in non-planner tissue profiles. 
Verification tests carried out on simulated silicon samples 
1430
  
showed that the probe is capable of estimating tissue stiffness 
values with high accuracy and repeatability.   This probe is 
unique in its ability to have an adjustable force range which is 
useful in limiting the forces applied onto the soft tissue thus 
avoiding accidental tissue damages. Indentation force can be 
adjusted through the control and regulation of the air pressure 
inside the probe. However, this makes pressure regulation 
and control essential for the correct operation of the probe. 
Further work aims at improving the sensor fabrication quality 
and modeling the sensor behavior under variety of operating 
conditions. Specially, modeling the behavior of the sensor 
under dynamic conditions, using moving mesh methods in 
FEA techniques is being done. Further, we aim to carry out 
ex-vivo and in-vivo trials to evaluate the sensors potential as 
a stiffness probe to detect tissue abnormalities. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. A. Krouskop, T. M. Wheeler, F. Kallel, B. S. Garra, and T. Hall, 
“Elastic moduli of breast and prostate tissues under compression,” 
Ultrason. Imag., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 260–274, 1998. 
[2] D.O.Uribe, R.Stroop, T.Hemsel, and J.Wallaschek ,"Development of a 
biomedical tissue differentiation system using piezoelectric 
actuators,"IEEE International Frequency Control Symposium, pp. 91 – 
94, 2008 
[3] H. Liu, J. Li, X. Song, L.D. Seneviratne, and K.  Althoefer, “Rolling 
indentation probe for tissue abnormality identification during 
minimally invasive surgery,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 27, 
pp. 450-460, 2011 
[4] K. Althoefer, D.  Zbyszewski, H. Liu, P.  Puangmali, L.D. 
Seneviratne, B. Challacombe, and D. Murphy, “Air-cushion force 
sensitive probe for soft tissue investigation during minimally invasive 
surgery,” IEEE Sensors, pp.827-830, 2008 
[5] I.B. Wanninayake, P. Dasgupta, L.D. Seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, 
'Air-float Palpation Probe for Tissue Abnormality Identification 
During Minimally Invasive Surgery' IEEE Transactions on 
Biomedical Engineering, vol 60, no. 10, pp. 2735-2744, 2013 
[6] K. Sangpradit, H. Liu, P. Dasgupta, K. Althoefer, and L.D. 
Seneviratne, “Finite-element modeling of soft tissue rolling 
indentation.,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 58, 
pp. 3319-3327, 2012 
[7] K. Sangpradit, H. Liu, P. Dasgupta, L.D. Seneviratne, and K. 
Althoefer, “Tissue identification using inverse finite element analysis 
of rolling indentation.” IEEE International Conference on In Robotics 
and Automation, pp. 1250-1255, 2009 
[8] I.B. Wanninayake, K. Althoefer, and L.D. Seneviratne, “Novel Air-
float Tactile Array for Stiffness Characterization in Soft Tissue 
Palpation,” Procedia Engineering, Volume 41, pp. 281-288, 2012 
[9] A. M. Sabatini, P. Dario, and M. Bergamasco, “Interpretation of 
mechanical properties of soft tissues from tactile measurements,” Exp. 
Robot., vol. 139, pp. 152–162, 1990. 
[10] J. Dargahi, S. Najarian, V. Mirjalili, and B. Liu, “Modeling and 
testing of a sensor capable of determining the stiffness of biological 
tissues,” Can. J. Electr. Comput. Eng., vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 45–51, 2007. 
[11] M.P. Ottensmeyer and J.K. Salisbury, “In Vivo Data Acquisition 
Instrument for Solid Organ Mechanical Property Measurement”, In 
Proceedings of the 4
th
 International Conference on Medical Image 
Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention (MICCAI '01), Wiro 
J. Niessen and Max A. Viergever (Eds.). Springer-Verlag, London, 
UK, UK, 975-982. 
[12] K. L. Johnson, Contact Mechanics. Cambridge, U.K. Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1985. 
[13] P. Fong, “Sensing, acquisition, and interactive playback of data-based 
models for elastic deformable objects,” the International Journal of 
Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 630–655, May 2009. 
[14] B. Frank, R Schmedding, c. Stachniss, m. Teschner, and w. Burgard, 
“Learning the elasticity parameters of deformable objects with a 
manipulation robot,” pp. 1877–1883, oct. 2010. 
[15] J. Lang, D. K. Pai, and R. J. Woodham, “Acquisition of elastic models 
for interactive simulation,” the International Journal of Robotics 
Research, vol. 21, no. 8, pp. 713–733, Aug. 2002.  
[16] I.B. Wanninayake, L.D. Seneviratne, K. Althoefer, “Novel indentation 
depth measuring system for stiffness characterization in soft tissue 
palpation”, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.  Automation, 2012, 4648-
4653 
[17] D.C. Lin, D.I. Shreiber, E.K. Dimitriadis, and F. Horkay,"Spherical 
indentation of soft matter beyond the Hertzian regime: numerical and 
experimental validation of hyperelastic models", Biomechanics and 
Modeling in Mechanobiology,8,345-358, 2009 
[18] H. Liu, J. Li, Q. Poon, L.D. seneviratne, and K. Althoefer, 
“Miniaturized force-indentation depth sensor for tissue abnormality 
identifaction during laparoscopic surgery”, IEEE international 
conference on Robotics and Automation, pp 3654-3659, 2010 
[19] C. Anthony, Fischer-Cripps, “Introduction to Contact Mechanics”, 
2nd ed., New York, NY: Springer, 2007, ch. 6, pp. 101–114. 
[20] Bo. Qiang, J. Greenleaf, M. Oyen, and X. Zhang, "Estimating material 
elasticity by spherical indentation load-relaxation tests on viscoelastic 
samples of finite thickness," IEEE Transactions on Ultrasonics, 
Ferroelectrics and Frequency Control, , vol.58, no.7, pp.1418-1429, 
July 2011 
[21] E. K. Dimitriadis, F. Horkay, J. Maresca, B. Kachar, and R. S. 
Chadwick, “Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft 
material using the atomic force microscope,” Biophys. J., vol. 82, 
pp.2798–2810, May 2002. 
 
1431
