A Wirelessly Powered, Biologically Inspired Ambulatory Microrobot
Michael Karpelson, Benjamin H. Waters, Benjamin Goldberg, Brody Mahoney,
Onur Ozcan, Andrew Baisch, Pierre-Marie Meyitang, Joshua R. Smith, and Robert J. Wood
Abstract— Onboard power remains a major challenge for
miniature robotic platforms. Locomotion at small scales de-
mands high power densities from all system components, while
limited payload capacities place severe restrictions on the size of
the energy source, resulting in integration challenges and short
operating times when using conventional batteries. Wireless
power delivery has the potential to allow microrobotic platforms
to operate autonomously for extended periods when near a
transmitter. This paper describes the ﬁrst demonstration of RF
wireless power transfer in an insect-scale ambulatory robot.
A wireless power transmission system based on magnetically
coupled resonance is designed for the latest iteration of the
Harvard Ambulatory MicroRobot (HAMR), a piezoelectrically
driven quadruped that had previously received power through
a tether. Custom power and control electronics are designed and
implemented on lightweight printed circuit boards that form a
part of the mechanical structure of the robot. The integration
of the onboard receiver, power and control electronics, and
mechanical structure yields a 4cm, 2.1g robot that can operate
autonomously in two wireless power transmission scenarios.
I. INTRODUCTION
Miniature robots inspired by ambulatory insects offer
great potential in such applications as search-and-rescue,
hazardous environmental exploration, and infrastructure in-
spection. Swarms of inexpensive, mass-produced robotic
insects with locomotion capabilities similar to their biolog-
ical counterparts could traverse terrain and penetrate spaces
inaccessible to humans and large-scale robots, executing
complex, challenging missions through collective behaviors
and a high degree of redundancy. However, implementing
self-contained energy sources is extremely challenging in
insect-scale robots due to the lack of appropriately sized
batteries with high power and energy densities [1] and the
increase in cost of transport at lower scales [2], while any
form of tethered power delivery can severely restrict the
mobility and reliability of microrobotic platforms.
Wireless power is a viable option to replace or complement
state-of-the-art battery technology in any application where
robots can remain in close proximity to a transmitter when
operating or recharging an onboard battery. In one scenario,
robots could receive power through walls, ﬂoors, or ceilings,
allowing them to perform inspection and repair tasks inside
the walls or between the ﬂoors of a building (Fig. 1(a)).
M. Karpelson, B. Goldberg, O. Ozcan, A. Baisch, P.-M. Meyi-
tang, and R. J. Wood are with the School of Engineering and Ap-
plied Sciences and the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired En-
gineering, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 (contact e-mail:
michael.karpelson@wyss.harvard.edu)
B. H. Waters, B. Mahoney, and J. R. Smith are with the Department of
Computer Science and Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
98195 (contact e-mail: bhw2114@uw.edu)
12345679
12345679
B
A
Fig. 1. Conceptual scenarios of wireless power delivery to microrobots:
inspection and repair tasks inside the walls or between the ﬂoors of
a building (a), and operation in a structured environment with multiple
embedded transmitters, such as a factory or warehouse (b).
Wireless power can also prove advantageous in structured
environments with multiple transmitters embedded through-
out an area, such as a factory ﬂoor, warehouse, or building
conduit (Fig. 1(b)).
The Harvard Ambulatory MicroRobot (HAMR) is a bi-
ologically inspired, insect-scale robotic platform, currently
in its ﬁfth mechanical design iteration. Previous versions of
HAMR have demonstrated short-term autonomous operation
using battery power [3], controlled high-speed locomotion
with external power [4], and the application of novel fabri-
cation techniques suitable for mass production [5]. Onboard
power for HAMR is complicated not only by the small
scale and limited payload capacity of the robot, but also
by the operational requirements of the high energy density
piezoelectric actuators [6] used to drive its legs. These
actuators require high-voltage, time-varying drive signals in
the range of 200-300V and 1-50Hz, introducing signiﬁcant
challenges in the design of power and drive electronics, and
translating to overall input power requirements on the order
of 10mW to 1W, depending on gait frequency. Wireless
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2384
power transmission can provide onboard voltages in the tens
of volts; while not enough to drive piezoelectric actuators
directly, this allows for more compact and efﬁcient voltage
conversion circuits.
Previously, resonant-based wireless power techniques have
been used to demonstrate wireless operation of simple
centimeter-scale wheeled robots on a surface surrounded by a
transmit coil [7], while inductive techniques have seen appli-
cation in robotic micromanipulation and microassembly [8].
Biomedical applications, such as capsule endoscopy, have
also been investigated [9]. This work leverages the HAMR
platform to demonstrate the ﬁrst application of RF wireless
power transmission to an insect-scale ambulatory robot.
Section II reviews the principles of wireless power trans-
mission based on magnetically coupled resonance (MCR)
and describes the design and characterization of a wireless
power system suitable for HAMR. Section III discusses the
design and fabrication of HAMR’s mechanical and electronic
components, including the wireless power receiver, voltage
conversion circuits, high-voltage drive circuits, and control
logic. Finally, Section IV presents initial experimental results
from a fully integrated, wirelessly powered HAMR, includ-
ing open-loop autonomous locomotion.
II. WIRELESS POWER TRANSMISSION
Implementing wireless power in an insect-scale robot
presents a number of challenges. HAMR’s 0:01-1W input
power requirements and 1:5g maximum payload capacity
make far-ﬁeld wireless power transfer, such as radiated
electromagnetic energy, difﬁcult to implement. The efﬁciency
of far-ﬁeld wireless power techniques is typically less than
1%, which would require a very large power ampliﬁer
on the transmit side to accommodate the maximum load
of HAMR [10]. There have recently been demonstrations
of microwave wireless power transfer using phased-array
antennas and beam-forming techniques to deliver 1W over
a range of 10m [11]. However, this technique also requires
a very large transmit antenna array and suffers from poor
efﬁciency.
Near-ﬁeld techniques, such as inductive coupling and
MCR, provide far better efﬁciency at the expense of range.
The range of an efﬁcient MCR system is proportional to the
size of the transmit and receive coils. Implementing wireless
power transfer using MCR on a microrobot requires the
receive coil to be minimized for weight, but large enough
for efﬁcient power transfer at the desired operating range.
Therefore, the design of the transmit and receive coils has
a signiﬁcant impact on the capabilities of a wireless power
system for microrobotic applications.
Two different wireless power transfer conﬁgurations have
been implemented. Both scenarios can be envisioned from
Fig. 2. First, a single transmit loop and coil deliver power
to a receive coil mounted on HAMR such that the system
achieves highest peak efﬁciency for the greatest axial sep-
aration distance (d) between the transmit and receive coils.
This ﬁrst scenario could be used to deliver power efﬁciently
through a thick wall or table to a microrobot, as in Fig. 1(a).
TRANSMIT
LOOPANDCOIL
x
HAMRcrawlingpath
HAMR
RELAY
COILS
TRANSMITTER
d
Fig. 2. Block diagram of the wireless power conﬁgurations.
  
RP1
RP2
RP,RX
L1
L2
LRX
CRX
C2
C1
 
RFAmplifier
VS
IN OUT
FW REV
Detector MCU
K12
TRANSMITTER
RECEIVER
  RP3
L3
C3
 
  RPn
Ln
Cn
 
RELAYCOILS
K23 K3n
K2RX
HAMRcrawlingpath
K3RX KnRX K1RX
HAMR
Fig. 3. Equivalent circuit diagram of the wireless power conﬁgurations.
Second, one transmit loop and coil along with several passive
relay coils can be used to maintain constant power delivery
to HAMR as it crawls along the coil array. The goal of this
scenario is to achieve high average efﬁciency over the longest
horizontal distance (x) between the transmit coil and receiver.
This second scenario provides power across an entire ﬂoor
(or wall), such that the microrobot can crawl freely along
the entire surface area of the coils, as in Fig. 1(b). The relay
coils can also be placed in a two-dimensional grid spanning
an entire ﬂoor or wall.
A. Design of the Wireless Power Transfer System using
Magnetically Coupled Resonators
The most basic coil topology is a 2-element system, which
comprises one transmit coil and one receive coil. Although
this simple conﬁguration reduces the size and weight of both
the transmit and receive coils, the range at which efﬁcient
power transfer occurs is less than that of a 3 or 4-element
system [12]. A 4-element system can substantially increase
the range of wireless power transfer. However, the transmit
and receive resonators both require a coil and an additional
loop. The added weight from the receive loop diminishes
the potential improvement in range because the receive coil
must shrink in size to maintain the same overall weight. Also,
miniaturizing a properly tuned 4-element system is problem-
atic due to the precision necessary for optimal loop-to-coil
coupling [13]. A 3-element system consisting of a transmit
loop and coil, and a receive coil, presents a compromise
between the 2 and 4-element systems – it extends the range
of the 2-element system while minimizing the weight and
complexity of the receive coil conﬁguration. Therefore, a
2385
TABLE I
EXPERIMENTAL COIL GEOMETRIES AND PARASITIC COIL PARAMETERS
PARAMETER BLUE TX COIL GOLD TX COILS RX COIL 
L (!H) 3.78 2.84 3.25 
C (pF) 36 4.9 42
 
R (Ω)
  
0.9394 8.83 2.71 
Q 331.6 272.9 102.6 
F (MHz) 13.56 13.48 13.56 
# Turns
 
6 9 6 
OD (mm) 14.2 25.6*, 17.0** 30.0 
ID  (mm) 5.4 19.0*, 10.0** 27.8 
AWG 14 (1.63mm) 18 (1.024mm) 33 (0.18mm) 
Weight (mg) n/a n/a 180.0 
    
 
* Width of major axis for rounded rectangular coil
** Width of minor axis for rounded rectangular coil
3-element system has been selected for this application, with
the option of including any number of additional relay coils.
Fig. 3 shows the equivalent circuit schematic for the 3-
element wireless power system. The transmitter consists of
a signal generator that passes a radio-frequency (RF) signal
to an AR Modular KAA2030 Class A power ampliﬁer (PA).
The output of the PA passes through a bi-directional coupler
to inductor L
1
, a single-turn loop with parasitic resistance
R
P1
, and tuning capacitor C
1
. The attenuated forward and
reﬂected waves from the directional coupler are passed to
an RF magnitude and phase detector. These values can be
sampled at up to 200kHz by the microcontroller unit (MCU).
This feedback loop can be used for frequency tracking
by minimizing the amount of reﬂected RF energy and for
providing some indication of the power delivered to the
load without requiring an additional radio communication
link, which would add cost and weight to the receiver [14].
The transmit loop couples to the transmit coil L
2
with
coupling coefﬁcient k
12
. Passive relay coils can extend the
range of wireless power transfer. Without the relay coils, the
transmitter and receiver form a 3-element wireless power
system. With the relay coils, the receive coil will receive
power from the nearest relay coil.
The size and quality factor (Q) of the receive coil should
be maximized for long range and highly efﬁcient wireless
power transfer. A larger receive coil means more magnetic
ﬂux can be captured from a transmit coil at greater separation
distances, and higher Q implies higher efﬁciency. High Q
requires high inductance and low resistance: the coil needs
to have enough turns to maximize the inductance while using
a wire gauge (AWG) that is thick enough to minimize resis-
tance and loss. However, the weight and the outer diameter
(OD) of the receive coil are limited in this application by
the maximum payload capacity and the physical size of the
microrobot. Therefore the receive coil design requires careful
optimization of the number of turns, conductor diameter,
and coil diameter for the highest Q constrained by the
maximum allowable weight (180mg) and maximum outer
Fig. 4. The blue transmit coil and receive coil used to demonstrate high
peak efﬁciency.
0 20 40 60 80 100 120
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Distance (mm)
|S
21
| 
2
 
 
 
Single Frequency (13.56MHz)
Frequency Tracking
Student Version of MATLAB
Fig. 5. Plot of jS
21
j
2
for the blue transmit coil.
diameter (30mm) to physically ﬁt on HAMR. The receive
coil is visible in Figures 4 and 6. Its electrical and geometric
parameters are summarized in Table I along with all of the
transmit coil parameters.
B. High Peak Efﬁciency Wireless Power System
The ﬁrst transmit coil conﬁguration, shown in Fig. 4,
consists of a single-turn drive loop and multi-turn coil.
The size and geometry of the blue transmit coil have been
optimized, given the 30mm outer diameter of the receive
coil, to maximize efﬁciency over the longest axial separation
distance.
An HP8753ES vector network analyzer (VNA) is used to
extract scattering parameters (S-parameters) for a range of
distances between the coil and jS
21
j
2
has been plotted in
Fig. 5. jS
21
j
2
is indicative of efﬁciency, and jS
21
j
2
> 90%
can be achieved up to 20mm away from the transmitter,
which would efﬁciently power the microrobot through a
2386
thin wall or table. The maximum range is determined by
the maximum output power of the PA (100W). HAMR
can receive sufﬁcient power, even under the maximum load
condition of 1W, up to distances beyond 117mm where
efﬁciency drops below 1%. If the outer diameter of the
transmit coil decreases, the efﬁciency drop will occur at
a shorter separation distance and will also decline more
rapidly. If the transmit coil size increases, the efﬁciency peak
will decrease because there will be less magnetic coupling
between the two coils.
C. High Average Efﬁciency Wireless Power System
The second coil conﬁguration uses relay coils to extend the
range of the wireless power transfer across a larger surface
area. This topology is shown in Fig. 6(a-d) for one transmit
coil and three, two, one, and zero relay coils, respectively.
The design goal for these coils is to achieve a maximally ﬂat
magnetic ﬁeld distribution across the surface of the transmit
and relay coils so HAMR can crawl along the surface of any
coil and achieve relatively constant efﬁciency. Therefore, the
turn-to-turn pitch gradually increases towards the center of
the coil, and ideally the turns should extend all the way to the
center of the coil for maximally ﬂat designs [15]. However
this is not possible for the selected coil geometry because the
coil is already self-resonant at 13:56MHz with 9 turns and
cannot be tuned for 13:56MHz if the inductance increases
further. The rounded rectangular coil shape is selected so that
the coils can be placed in a horizontal grid with a minimally
disruptive transition when crawling from one coil to the next.
The coils are mounted beneath a 1=8” acrylic sheet that
measures 25:6x19cm according to the largest dimensions of
each coil.
The most challenging aspect of the design is sizing the
transmit loop, which is only present on the transmit coil.
The size of the loop is proportional to the loop-coil coupling
coefﬁcient k
12
. If k
12
is high, then high efﬁciency can
only be achieved if HAMR is above the transmit coil, but
efﬁciency drops off signiﬁcantly if it is above any of the
relay coils. Similarly, if k
12
is low (i.e. small loop size),
then high efﬁciency is achieved above the relay coils, but not
the transmit coil. The loop size is optimized for equivalent
efﬁciency above both the transmit coil and the relay coils.
A linear actuator, visible in Fig. 6(a), is used to move
the receive coil along the coil array. Four separate sets of
S-parameter measurements are extracted using the VNA for
each of the coil conﬁgurations shown in Fig. 6. In each case,
the zero distance point is set at the left side of the transmit
coil and the distance is incremented in 5mm steps up to the
rightmost edge of the last coil in the given conﬁguration.
The results for jS
21
j
2
are shown in Fig. 7.
For each additional relay coil, the peak and average
jS
21
j
2
both drop because of the increased loss from parasitic
resistances and coupling coefﬁcients. The average jS
21
j
2
for
the conﬁguration with the transmit coil only is 0:323 with
a standard deviation of 0:066. The transmit coil and one
relay coil achieve an average efﬁciency of0:254 and standard
deviation of 0:079. Two relay coils show an average of 0:221
Fig. 6. Picture of the gold coils used for maintaining a constant average
efﬁciency.
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Distance (mm)
|S
21
|
2
 
 
1 TX ? 3 RELAYS
1 TX ? 2 RELAYS
1 TX ? 1 RELAY
1 TX ONLY
Student Version of MATLAB
Fig. 7. Plot of jS
21
j
2
for the gold coils using frequency tracking.
with a standard deviation of 0:073, and, ﬁnally, three relay
coils achieve an average of 0:208 with a standard deviation
of 0:081. This ﬁnal result conﬁrms that a 30mm receive coil
can be powered at a distance of 1m away from the transmit
coil (nearly 330 times larger than the receive coil diameter)
with an average efﬁciency of 0:208.
Between two adjacent coils, there is always a dip in jS
21
j
2
because the magnetic ﬁelds between the respective relay coil
and the receive coil destructively interfere. However, jS
21
j
2
always remains above the minimum required efﬁciency (1%)
for power delivery to HAMR. Lastly, as more relay coils
are added to the system, additional resonant modes are
excited [16]. This phenomenon emphasizes the need for fre-
quency tracking because the optimal frequency for efﬁcient
wireless power transfer will change depending on the number
of modes.
2387
III. MICROROBOT DESIGN AND FABRICATION
A. Mechanical Design and Manufacturing
The robot used in this work is mechanically identical to
HAMR-VP, the ﬁrst robot designed and built using the “pop-
up book MEMS” manufacturing paradigm that is capable of
locomotion [5]. It is designed to be a quadruped instead of
a hexapod in order to decrease the fabrication complexity,
and it maintains stability due to its sprawled stance. Each
HAMR-VP leg has two degrees of freedom (DOF) and can
move up and down (lift) as well as forward and backward
(swing). Forward locomotion is achieved by actuating the
two DOFs with a 90

phase difference, which causes a box-
like motion of the feet.
The lift and swing DOFs are actuated using optimal
energy density piezoelectric bimorph cantilevers [6], selected
due to their simple geometry, scalability, compatibility with
pop-up book MEMS, and successful implementations in
other miniature robots [17], [18]. Each actuator comprises a
carbon ﬁber core sandwiched between two 127m thick lead-
zirconate-titanate (PZT-5H) plates, as well as a patterned
copper-clad FR-4 layer for electrical and mechanical con-
nections. The swing DOFs of the front and rear leg pairs are
coupled such that when one leg swings forward, the other
swings back. This simpliﬁes the transmission and reduces the
number of actuators from eight to six. Four-bar slider-crank
transmissions amplify actuator outputs and transfer them to a
spherical ﬁve-bar (SFB) hip joint, which couples the lift and
swing DOFs and transfers motion to the leg. The SFB design
was introduced in HAMR2 [19] and also implemented in
HAMR3 [3], HAMR-V [4], and HAMR-VP [5]. A detailed
description of the mechanical design of HAMR-VP can be
found in [5].
The body, actuators, printed circuit boards (PCBs), and
legs of HAMR-VP are manufactured separately to allow
modularity; differently sized actuators, boards, and legs are
frequently used to create alternate HAMR versions for differ-
ent applications. The fabrication process for all of HAMR’s
components is based on laser micromachining and lamination
of different material layers (e.g. PZT for actuators, FR4
for PCBs). For example, HAMR’s body consists of 23
individual material layers that are patterned using a diode-
pumped solid-state (DPSS) laser and bonded together to
form four sub-laminates, each comprising ﬁve layers: carbon
ﬁber, acrylic adhesive, Kapton, acrylic adhesive, carbon ﬁber.
The sub-laminates, which incorporate rigid links and ﬂexible
joints, are selectively bonded together by 3 additional layers
of adhesive and unfold to form the body. Fig. 8 shows the
sub-laminates and the unfolding process. Additional details
on fabrication can be found in [5] and [18].
B. Electronic Design
Fig. 9 shows a schematic of the onboard electronics
package designed for the wirelessly powered HAMR. Power
is delivered via the receive coil, tuning capacitor C
TUNE
,
and the rectiﬁer, as described in Section II. Since the rectiﬁed
voltage may vary depending on the distance from and orien-
tation with respect to the transmit coil, the power conversion
Outer sub-laminates
Pop-up linkage
Input four-bars
Assembly features and 
exoskeleton reinforcement
a b c
d
Lift four-bar
Swing four-bar
Assembly strut
Leg attachment
Fig. 8. The outer sub-laminates (gray) form the exoskeleton and the four
SFBs. The inner sub-laminates contain the pop-up linkages, assembly fea-
tures, and input four-bars. (a) HAMR body after lamination. (b) Separation
of inner sub-laminates. (c) Extension to ﬁnal width, constrained by pop-up
linkages. (d) Deployment of four-bars by manual folding.
circuits are designed to operate with an input voltage ranging
from 10V to 35V . HAMR converts the input voltage to a
high-voltage supply used to drive the piezoelectric actuators,
which can be conﬁgured to deliver up to 300V , and to a low-
voltage supply for the control logic, conﬁgured at 4.5V . Since
the high-voltage supply accounts for the majority of power
consumption, a tapped inductor switching boost converter
is used to maximize efﬁciency; the control logic consumes
relatively little power, and therefore an adjustable linear
regulator (LM317L-N) is used to generate the low-voltage
supply to minimize mass and footprint.
The tapped inductor boost converter operates by modulat-
ing switch Q
B
to periodically store energy in the primary
winding L
P
of the tapped inductor and deliver it to output
capacitorC
HV
via the primary and secondary windings and
the diode D
HV
. The output voltage is monitored by the
onboard Atmel ATmega168PA 8-bit microcontroller via a
resistive divider, and a conventional pulse frequency modula-
tion scheme produces a constant high voltage acrossC
HV
for
a range of load currents. Additional details on this topology
can be found in [20] and [21].
The high voltage is converted into a time-varying drive
signal for the piezoelectric bimorph actuators (represented
by capacitances C
A1
and C
A2
) by an array of high-voltage
drive circuits, one per actuator. These are half-bridge circuits
consisting of a PNP transistor acting as high-side switchQ
H
and NPN transistors acting as low-side switchesQ
L
andQ
P
.
The low-side switches are used to turn the PNP on and off
2388
L
S
LM317L-N
ATMEGA168PA
RECEIVE COIL TAPPED INDUCTOR BOOST CONVERTER HIGH VOLTAGE DRIVER PIEZO
CONTROL LOGIC
RECTIFIER
L
P
C
IN
C
HV
C
TUNE
Q
H
Q
L
C
A1
C
A2
R
OUT
Q
P
Q
B
D
HV
C
LV
6
6
R
OUT
Fig. 9. A schematic of HAMR electronics.
in a simple push-pull conﬁguration. The square-wave output
of the half-bridge is ﬁltered by the RC network formed by
resistors R
OUT
and the actuator capacitances. The control
signals to Q
L
and Q
P
are generated, with precise timing
to achieve the desired gait frequency and direction, by the
Atmel microcontroller. In this work, HAMR’s actuators are
driven with quasi-square wave signals (i.e. square waves
with an RC delay). However, the same circuit architecture
can be used to generate arbitrary drive signal waveforms via
pulse width and pulse frequency modulation techniques, as
described previously in [22].
C. PCB Fabrication
The circuits of Fig. 9 are instantiated physically on two
PCBs, an upper “control” PCB housing the rectiﬁer, the
power conversion circuits, and the Atmel microcontroller,
and a lower “drive” PCB containing the high-voltage drive
circuits and serving as an electrical and mechanical connec-
tion for the piezoelectric actuators. The upper PCB is 5-mil
FR4 with a 1/2 oz. copper layer on one side, while the lower
PCB is similar but has copper on both sides (the back side
of the board is used exclusively for a ground connection).
To minimize weight, the smallest available packages are
used for the circuit components. Due to the small size of
the components and the fact that the manufacturers’ clear-
ance guidelines must occasionally be violated to minimize
the board footprint, custom lithography and solder reﬂow
processes are required to produce the boards. All of the
circuit components are off-the-shelf with the exception of
the receive coil and the tapped inductor. The former is hand-
wound using a custom laser-cut jig, while the latter uses
a ferrite bobbin core salvaged from the Coilcraft LPS5030
series of power inductors and a custom winding tool to form
the primary and secondary windings L
P
and L
S
.
PCB lithography and board outline machining are per-
formed using the same DPSS laser used to produce the me-
chanical components. Two additional laser-machined com-
Fig. 10. Completed drive board (right) and control board (left).
ponents assist with PCB population: a solder mask made
from 1 mil Kapton tape facilitates solder paste application,
and an alignment jig made from FR4 aids in component
placement and alignment during the reﬂow process. The
populated board is preheated on a hot plate at 180

C for
10 minutes and reﬂowed in a Puhui T-962A infrared reﬂow
oven according to component and solder speciﬁcations.
After reﬂow, the alignment jig is removed, and a ﬁnal
DPSS laser cut removes sacriﬁcal alignment features from
the boards. In the current version of the process, vias are
soldered manually. Fig. 10 shows the completed drive and
control boards.
D. Integration
The PCBs serve as a structural component of HAMR.
After the pop-up mechanical structure of Fig. 8 is deployed,
tabs on the sides of the PCBs are locked into slots in the
sides of the exoskeleton (outer sub-laminates in Fig. 8).
The drive board serves as a mechanical ground for the
piezoelectric actuators, which are oriented parallel to the sub-
laminates and secured in slots in the board. Contact pads on
the actuators are soldered to pads on the drive board. An
auxiliary FR4 layer with similar slots secures the actuators on
the bottom side of the robot. The control board is locked into
the exoskeleton above the drive board and provides additional
exoskeletal reinforcement.
2389
Fig. 11. A fully assembled HAMR with onboard electronics and wireless
power components.
The control and drive board are connected with ﬂex cables
made from copper-laminated Kapton via the same lithogra-
phy process used to manufacture the boards. The cables are
secured permanently to the drive board and attached to the
control board using custom, laser-machined stainless steel
connectors weighing less than 5mg each. The receive coil is
soldered manually to the control board and can be positioned
in various orientations on the exoskeleton using a temporary
or permanent mounting adhesive.
IV. RESULTS
A fully assembled HAMR with onboard electronics and
wireless power components is shown in Fig. 11. The robot
weights 2.1g, including a 275mg control board, 400mg drive
board, and 180mg receive coil. As an initial demonstration
of wireless power transmission, HAMR is programmed to
commence open-loop locomotion at various gait frequencies
whenever sufﬁcient power is available to maintain the high-
voltage rail to the actuators (conﬁgured at a conservative
195V in the current prototype of the control board). Fig. 12
shows HAMR achieving wirelessly powered locomotion in
both the single high-efﬁciency transmit coil scenario and the
multiple relay coil scenario described in Section II. In both
cases, the transmit coils are driven by a KAA2030M20 power
ampliﬁer from AR Modular. Due to the fact that HAMR is
running open-loop, it is unable to compensate for deviations
from straight-line locomotion. As a result, some degree of
sideways drift can be observed in Fig. 12.
The combined weight of the onboard electronics and
transmit coil brings HAMR close to the limits of its payload
capacity. As a result, the prototype used in this work is not
able to achieve the highest speeds demonstrated by tethered
versions of HAMR [23] and is limited to about 0.5 body
lengths per second. However, the ability to achieve locomo-
tion in two wireless power transmission scenarios supports
Fig. 12. Composite image of several video frames showing HAMR
crawling on a clear acrylic sheet 5cm above the blue transmit coil (top), and
an image of HAMR crawling on a relay coil, over 40cm from the center of
the actively driven coil on the right (bottom). Both cases are at 20Hz gait
frequency.
1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4
40
50
60
70
80
Transmit power (W)
Range (mm)
Fig. 13. Wireless power transmission range as a function of transmit power
(measured at 1Hz gait frequency).
the feasibility of wireless power for microrobotic applica-
tions. Locomotion performance can be improved by applying
previously developed weight reduction techniques [24] to on-
board electronic components and by reducing the number of
manual assembly steps, which can compromise mechanical
performance and add unnecessary weight (e.g. solder).
Fig. 13 shows the wireless power transmission range as
a function of transmit power for the single transmit coil
scenario (blue coil). Higher range is attainable at the cost
of decreasing power transmission efﬁciency (for example,
the ampliﬁer used in this experiment can deliver 100W).
Increasing range while maintaining efﬁciency necessitates a
larger receive coil, as noted in Section II.
2390
The range measurements of Fig. 13 are performed with the
transmit and receive coils oriented parallel to each other and
axially aligned. The effects of changing the relative angle
of the coils or introducing a horizontal offset distance have
not been fully characterized; however, preliminary results
indicate that the coil arrangement in the single-coil scenario
can tolerate over 4cm offset distance and up to 45

of
misalignment.
V. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents the ﬁrst demonstration of RF wireless
power transmission in an insect-scale quadrupedal robot. The
work focuses on designing a wireless power transmission
system capable of providing sufﬁcient power to the HAMR
microrobotic platform, implementing modular power and
control electronics with minimal weight and footprint, and
system integration. The result is a 2.1g robot that can operate
autonomously in two wireless power transmission scenarios.
Future work will focus on improving locomotion per-
formance through weight reduction techniques and demon-
strating more complex behaviors. These improvements are
expected to pave the way for implementing wireless power
in microrobotic platforms with smaller payload capacities,
such as RoboBees [25]. Other avenues of exploration include
orthogonal transmit coil arrangements (or, alternatively, or-
thogonally oriented receive coils), which can enable wireless
operation in scenarios where the movement of the microrobot
will cause substantial changes in the relative angle between
the transmit and receive coils. Scenarios where wireless
power transmission complements an onboard battery, rather
than replacing it, may be investigated. Here, the microrobot
could seamlessly transition from full wireless power to
battery power with continuous wireless recharging, to full
battery power as the robot moves further from the nearest
available transmitter. Finally, far-ﬁeld RF techniques could
potentially enable much longer range than the near-ﬁeld
approach demonstrated here, at the cost of efﬁciency.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the Wyss
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, the Micro
Autonomous Systems and Technology (MAST) Collabora-
tive Technology Alliance, and the NSF Engineering Research
Center for Sensorimotor Neural Engineering (CSNE), NSF
Award EEC-1028725.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Karpelson, J. Whitney, G.-Y . Wei, and R. Wood, “Energetics of
ﬂapping-wing robotic insects: towards autonomous hovering ﬂight,”
in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Oct. 2010,
pp. 1630–1637.
[2] R. J. Full, D. A. Zuccarello, and A. Tullis, “Effect of variation in
form on the cost of terrestrial locomotion,” Journal of Experimental
Biology, vol. 150, no. 1, pp. 233–246, 1990.
[3] A. T. Baisch, C. Heimlich, M. Karpelson, and R. J. Wood, “HAMR
3
:
An autonomous 1.7g ambulatory robot,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, Sept. 2011, pp. 5073–5079.
[4] O. Ozcan, A. Baisch, and R. J. Wood, “Design and feedback control of
a biologically-inspired miniature quadruped,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013.
[5] A. Baisch and R. J. Wood, “Pop-up assembly of a quadrupedal
ambulatory microrobot,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, 2013.
[6] R. J. Wood, E. Steltz, and R. S. Fearing, “Optimal energy density
piezoelectric bending actuators,” Sensors & Actuators: A. Physical,
vol. 119, no. 2, pp. 476–488, 2005.
[7] T. Deyle and M. Reynolds, “Surface based wireless power transmission
and bidirectional communication for autonomous robot swarms,” in
IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2008, pp. 1036–1041.
[8] J. Gao, “Inductive power transmission for untethered micro-robots,”
in 31st Annual Conf. of the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 2005.
[9] R. Carta and R. Puers, “Wireless power and data transmission for
robotic capsule endoscopes,” in IEEE Symp. on Communications and
Vehicular Technology in the Benelux (SCVT), 2011, pp. 1–6.
[10] A. Sample, D. Yeager, P. Powledge, A. Mamishev, and J. Smith, “De-
sign of an RFID-based battery-free programmable sensing platform,”
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 57,
no. 11, pp. 2608–2615, 2008.
[11] H. Zeine, “Wireless power transmission system,” Oct. 2013, US Patent
8,558,661.
[12] B. Cannon, J. Hoburg, D. Stancil, and S. Goldstein, “Magnetic
resonant coupling as a potential means for wireless power transfer
to multiple small receivers,” IEEE Transactions on Power Electronics,
vol. 24, no. 7, pp. 1819–1825, 2009.
[13] A. Sample, D. Meyer, and J. Smith, “Analysis, experimental results,
and range adaptation of magnetically coupled resonators for wireless
power transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58,
no. 2, pp. 544–554, 2011.
[14] A. Sample, B. Waters, S. Wisdom, and J. Smith, “Enabling seamless
wireless power delivery in dynamic environments,” Proceedings of the
IEEE, vol. 101, no. 6, pp. 1343–1358, 2013.
[15] J. Casanova, Z. N. Low, and J. Lin, “A loosely coupled planar wireless
power system for multiple receivers,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 3060–3068, Aug. 2009.
[16] D. Ahn and S. Hong, “A study on magnetic ﬁeld repeater in wireless
power transfer,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 60,
no. 1, pp. 360–371, Jan. 2013.
[17] K. Hoffman and R. Wood, “Passive undulatory gaits enhance walking
in a myriapod millirobot,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, Sept. 2011, pp. 1479–1486.
[18] P. Sreetharan, J. Whitney, M. Strauss, and R. Wood, “Monolithic
fabrication of millimeter-scale machines,” Journal of Micromechanics
and Microengineering, vol. 22, no. 055027, 2012.
[19] A. Baisch, P. Sreetharan, and R. Wood, “Biologically-inspired loco-
motion of a 2g hexapod robot,” in IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent
Robots and Systems, Oct. 2010, pp. 5360–5365.
[20] N. Vazquez, L. Estrada, C. Hernandez, and E. Rodriguez, “The tapped-
inductor boost converter,” in IEEE Int. Symposium on Industrial
Electronics, 2007, pp. 538–543.
[21] “Small, high-voltage boost converters,” Maxim Semiconductor Appli-
cation Note 1109, 2002.
[22] M. Karpelson, G.-Y . Wei, and R. J. Wood, “Milligram-scale high-
voltage power electronics for piezoelectric microrobots,” in IEEE Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2009, pp. 883–890.
[23] A. T. Baisch, O. Ozcan, B. Goldberg, D. Ithier, and R. J. Wood, “High
speed locomotion for a quadrupedal microrobot,” to appear: Int. J. of
Robotics Research, 2014.
[24] M. Karpelson, J. P. Whitney, G.-Y . Wei, and R. J. Wood, “Design and
fabrication of ultralight high-voltage power circuits for ﬂapping-wing
robotic insects,” in Applied Power Electronics Conf., 2011.
[25] K. Ma, P. Chirarattanon, S. Fuller, and R. J. Wood, “Controlled ﬂight
of a biologically inspired, insect-scale robot,” Science, vol. 340, pp.
603–607, 2013.
2391
