Dynamically Evaluated Gravity Compensation for the RAVEN Surgical
Robot
Andrew Lewis and Blake Hannaford
Abstract—Usinganaccelerometeronthebaseofarobot,itis
possible to calculate the torque required from each actuator in
order to maintain a known pose regardless of base orientation
with respect to the direction or magnitude of gravity. A simple
and novel method has been developed and implemented for
overcoming gravity induced torques on the RAVEN
TM
surgical
research robot. This innovation will allow for accurate control
of serial robot manipulators with re-orientable bases or for
those operating in non-stationary environments such as boats,
space stations, or moving vehicles.
I. INTRODUCTION
One of the most lauded and world-changing applications
for surgical robots is their potential for use in remote
locations without specialized surgeons [1]. One can easily
imagine the utility of a highly automated or teleoperated
mobile operating room in underdeveloped areas, battleﬁelds
or areas of natural disaster. In such cases, these operating
rooms may be on a rocking hospital boat or in a large
trailer on uneven terrain. These dynamic and unpredictable
applications introduce challenges in the low-level control of
surgical robots. This project aims to provide a solution to
the control of a surgical robot with an unknown or changing
orientation with respect to gravity.
Gravitational loads on robotic manipulators often present
a large, non-linear contribution to static and dynamic control.
In many cases, this load can be calculated and compensated
for when the positions of the robot links are known with
respect to a base frame. Traditionally this base frame is
stationary with respect to gravity, such as an industrial
robot bolted to a factory ﬂoor or a monolithic surgical
robot with a heavy, ﬁxed base column. This project aims
to provide similar compensation in cases where the base
cannot be assumed to be in a ﬁxed orientation with respect to
gravity; in such cases as a robotic arm attached to a mobile
reconnaissance platform or a surgical robot on an aircraft
carrier. It is proposed that actively evaluated gravity vector
compensation will greatly improve the control performance
of a serial robotic manipulator with a non-stationary base.
A. RAVEN Surgical Research Robot
The RA VEN surgical research robot is an open source
system developed at the University of Washington and the
Andrew Lewis is a research engineer at the BioRobotics Lab at the
University of Washington and Roboticist at Applied Dexterity, Seattle, WA
98195, USA andrew@applieddexterity.com
Blake Hannaford is with the Department of Electrical
Engineering, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195 , USA
blake@ee.washington.edu
RA VEN is a registered trademark of the University of Washington and
Applied Dexterity
Fig. 1: The RA VEN II surgical research robot system de-
veloped at the University of Washington and University of
California Santa Cruz. On the left are the control electronics
and emergency stop switch.
University of California Santa Cruz as a means of research-
ing and innovating in the ﬁeld of surgical robotics. After
developing and rigorously testing the limits RA VEN I [2],
development of RA VEN II began as a common research
platform for research labs across the US. In 2012, the ﬁrst
RA VEN II systems were shipped to seven top research insti-
tutions as the inaugural members of the RA VEN community
[3]. With a common platform built on software standards,
the RA VEN community is well suited to collaborating and
innovating in the space of surgical robotics and related ﬁelds.
The RA VEN II is a compact, cable-driven mechanism
with 3 spherical joints and a 4 Degree of Freedom tool.
The spherical joints mechanically constrain robot motion
to a virtual center, which is a desirable characteristic for
minimally invasive surgical robots since they must enter
the body through a key-hole incision. Figure 1 shows the
RA VEN II arms and controller.
B. Control with Gravity Compensation
The most common form of low-level control in robotics
applications is the Proportional Integral Derivative (PID)
controller or some combination of those terms. This family of
controllers determine motor torques using the error between
the robot’s current position and its desired position as the
input. Since the early 1990s, it has been known that PID
and PD controllers with a gravity compensation term are
stable about a reference position for any rigid manipulator
[4]. However, it has not yet been proven that PID controllers
can be globally stable in robots with elastic joints. Tomei has
shown that PD control with a gravity compensated term at
the desired conﬁguration is enough to prove global stability
about this reference position, but accurate knowledge of
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2534
gravitational effects is necessary for accurate positioning of
a robot with elastic joints.
Another challenge to controlling robots like the RA VEN
is the elasticity between the joints due to the use of cables.
Alessandro De Luca et al. has contributed a signiﬁcant
amount to the theory of controlling elastically jointed robots.
In [5], he points out that exotic, complex control solutions
are available for tracking tasks such as linearizing and de-
coupling nonlinear feedback, an integral manifold approach
based on perturbation of the dynamic model, or adaptive,
neural network control. He continues to survey the PD plus
gravity compensation approaches since [4] ﬁrst proved that
the gravity compensation of a desired position was sufﬁcient
for regulation task stability, with the gravity term g(q
d
)
where q is the robot pose and q
d
is the desired robot pose.
This approach is termed a constant gravity compensation
term. A nonlinear gravity compensation scheme requires
evaluating the required gravity torques for the current posi-
tion of the robot during its movement, g(q). Finally, gravity
compensation can take the form of an on-line term with
torques calculated from the motor positions when it is im-
practical to sense joint angles,g(). With elasticity between
the motors and the joints, on-line gravity compensation will
naturally lead to steady state errors because the actual pose
of the links is not compensated for. The contribution of [5] is
a PD control law with gravity compensation calculated with
a new variable g(
~
), a gravity-biased motor position that
uses a model of joint elasticity to provide a more accurate
description of the robot pose. This technique is shown to
have smoother control transients in the motor torques and
provides a larger range of feasible PD gains over the PD
controller with constant gravity compensation proposed in
[4].
C. Dynamics of Robots on Moving Bases
The Mitsubishi PA10-6CE has been used in several investi-
gations into the dynamics of robotic manipulators on moving
bases. A model was derived for arbitrary 6-DOF disturbances
and implemented for the robot by Wronka and Dunnigan
with a 2 DOF rotary base [6]. The derivation assumes that
the characteristics of the moving platform are known and it is
assumed that the motion of the manipulator has no signiﬁcant
inﬂuence on the motion of the base. The Lagrange-Euler
method is used for the full dynamic model. This technique
uses the total energy of the system and inherently includes
a gravity term in the calculation of potential energy. The
main goal of the work was to develop an accurate model
of the robot for simulation purposes and they found that
the model is accurate and the inclusion of a gravity term in
the model signiﬁcantly improves its performance for use in
future work with the robot. Sadraei and Moghaddam derive
both a Lagrange-Euler model and a Newton-Euler model of
the PA10-6CE and simulate the rocking of a ship to test
computational performance of the models [7].
In parallel with their modeling efforts, Dunnigan and
Wronka compared the performance of a wide variety of
model-based and adaptive control methods for a robot on
a moving base in [8]. This study used the PA10 robot on
a 6 DOF base and compared the control methods with no
base motion sensor, an angular orientation sensor, and an ac-
celerometer. Dunnigan found that joint-tracking performance
was greatly improved in all controllers with the inclinometer,
further improved with an accelerometer, and performed best
with an adaptive gravity compensation term. The researchers
concluded that not only could the adaptive term compensate
for changing gravity induced loads, it could also compensate
for unmodeled effects such as harmonic drive compliance.
In 1999, Iagnemma et al. constructed a low-cost model
similar to the JPL Lightweight Survivable Rover with a 6-
wheeled rocker-bogie system and a 3 DOF manipulation arm
with several end effectors [9]. Global torques on the manip-
ulator were measured with a 6-DOF force-torque sensor at
the base of the arm and a gravity compensation term was
used to subtract the contribution of gravity from the reading.
Instead of using gravity compensation as a term for motor
torque output, it is used as a term for compensating torque
feedback. It is mentioned that the gravity term is dependent
on the orientation of the base, which is measured by an
accelerometer.
D. Surgical Robots, Teleoperation, and Haptic Devices
A recent study investigated the effects of gravity com-
pensation of a haptic master controller under external ac-
celerations [10]. In order to compensate for the biodynamic
feedthrough of the limbs of the user, acceleration dependent
damping coefﬁcients and mass parameters were used in the
control of the Force Dimension omega.7 haptic controllers.
Preliminary results from experiments in an elevator and
moving van showed increased user performance over con-
stant damping. The tests culminated in a microgravity and
variable gravity experiment in which surgeons were asked to
perform suturing tasks with the devices with a teleoperated
SRI international M7 robot while on board the NASA C-
9 airborne parabolic laboratory. Results showed that the
variable acceleration compensation improved performance of
the user during constant and variable gravity, but did not
appear to help in zero g.
II. PROJECT GOALS
In the reviewed literature, only a few studies have men-
tioned the effects of changing base orientation and even
fewer have evaluated the use of sensors to study or com-
pensate for these effects. This project proposes to integrate
sensor data into the calculation of gravity compensation
torques and use this term to implement a PD plus gravity
compensation controller. Moreover, this project will study
the performance of a controller that is able to respond to
sensed relative gravity and acceleration data, deemed a PD
plus dynamic gravity compensation controller, or PD+DG for
short. This control and a standard static gravity vector com-
pensation controller (PD+SG) will be implemented on the
RA VEN surgical robot for controller performance evaluation.
The sections that follow describe the analysis of the problem,
2535
Fig. 2: A generalized model of a serial robot. By representing
the center of mass of each successive link in the frame of link
i, it is possible to calculate the required gravity compensation
torque for joint i.
approach to the solution, and a discussion of experimental
results on the RA VEN.
III. ANALYSIS
A method for solving for gravity torques on each gross-
positioning actuator was developed which allows for variable
acceleration vectors, center of mass (COM) parameters, and
kinematic details.
As shown in Figure 2, the torque on each joint is
determined by summing the torque contributions of each
successive link. This is easily accomplished using forward
kinematics transformations to represent each COM and the
acceleration vector in the frame of the joint being considered.
It is assumed that all frames are deﬁned using the Denavit-
Hartenberg convention. With this assumption, the force or
torque required to compensate for the contribution of external
accelerations is merely the negative z-component of the
calculated imposed force or torque. For rotary joint i, the
gravity compensation torque is

i
= 
i
^ z
N
X
k=i
i
r
k

i
gm
k
(1)
where
i
^ z is the unitz vector of framei ([0 0 1]
T
),N is the
number of links,
i
r
k
is the vector to the center of mass of link
k in frame i,
i
g is the external acceleration represented in
framei, andm
k
is the mass of linkk. The following equation
is used to ﬁnd the representation of gravity in frame i:
i
g =
i
s
T
s
g (2)
where s is the frame of the accelerometer.
The gravity compensation force for a prismatic joint is
f
i
= 
i
^ z
n
X
k=i
i
gm
k
(3)
Fig. 3: The base and gross positioning frames of the RA VEN
II robot as described in [11].
High level implementation of these equations with the help
of available kinematics transforms makes it easy to use a
variable value for
s
g. By incorporating acceleration data from
a sensor, this gravity compensation method can be easily
used to implement a dynamic gravity compensation term.
Center of mass locations for the RA VEN robot were
derived from CAD models of each link assembly. Link
assembly masses were directly measured during the latest
round of RA VEN construction. The forward kinematics for
RA VEN are analysed in [11]. Figure 3 shows the ﬁrst three
link frames used in the analysis.
IV. METHODS
A. System Architecture
In order to incorporate a new acceleration sensing modal-
ity to the RA VEN system, a sensing subsystem was designed
to communicate with the main RA VEN control via ROS
networking capabilities. A high-level system diagram can
be seen in Figure 4. A Bosch BMA180 accelerometer
breakout board (sparkfun.com) was used to sense the external
accelerations. An Arduino was used to communicate with the
sensor. The rosserial package was used on a netbook
computer connected to the Arduino via USB to allow ROS
messages to be generated on the Arduino at 100 Hz. Due to
data type limitations of therosserial package, a separate
node was implemented on the netbook to create agravity
message with acceleration vector and magnitude data. The
architecture of the sensing subsystem can be seen in Figure
5.
The RA VEN software was updated to subscribe to the
gravity message and the high-level gravity compensation
calculations were implemented. Since the functionality for
retrieving forward kinematics transformations was already
available, implementing the algorithm in an easy to read
manner was straightforward and allowed for variability in the
gravity vector and other parameters. If there is nogravity
topic published at start-up, a gravity vector for the nominally
level base orientation is assumed. However, if thegravity
topic is interrupted, the program will continue to use the last
published value.
Feedforward PD plus gravity compensation control was
implemented as seen in Figure 6. The gravity compensation
torque is a function of the current gravity (or acceleration)
2536
Fig. 4: High level architecture of proposed sensor integration
system.
Fig. 5: The sensing subsystem consisting of an accelerome-
ter, Arduino, and netbook computer.
vector and the sensed pose of the robot. The gravity torque
is added to the standard PD term. Additionally, the gravity
compensation term can be used by itself for a passive pose
compensator. This compensator mode was used to subjec-
tively validate the gravity compensation term by placing it
in a variety of poses at a variety of base orientations. The
compensation terms were known to be correct if the robot
held the pose without drifting.
B. Experimentation
The efﬁcacy and performance of the PD+DG controller
were tested under three conditions. In each condition, the
PD+DG controller was compared to a PD+SG controller
as described above. In order to not confound the effects of
gravity compensation, the PD gains were those used in the
standard RA VEN PD control and were the same in each
controller.
First, the controllers were validated against a standard
PD-only controller at a variety of robot poses and base
orientations. Each controller was used to maintain a static
pose at increments along the range of the ﬁrst joint. When
Fig. 6: A diagram of the PD+DG controller, in which a
desired orientation q
d
is achieved through negative position
feedback (from the robot pose q) into a PD term which is
summed with a feed-forward gravity compensation term G.
The function G is dependent on the robot pose q and the
gravity vector  g.
using the PD only controller, the gravity compensation terms
were calculated and compared to the applied torque. These
values were expected to be equal. The base angles tested
were about theZ
0
axis in Figure 3 and ranged from 0 to 20
degrees.
Next, the controller’s trajectory tracking performance was
tested with a test trajectory at the same range of increasing
base angles. The trajectory consisted of sequential sinu-
soidal motions along each Cartesian direction in the robot
workspace. The trajectory had an amplitude of 3.1 inches and
a period of 4 seconds for each direction and was observed for
two full cycles in each test. The trajectory was sent as a series
of workspace increments from the haptic master software at
1000 Hz.
Finally, trajectory performance was tested with continu-
ously changing base conditions. In this trajectory, the base
was rocked by hand between base angles of ten and twenty
degrees at a frequency of 1 Hz. This was accomplished
using a pair of lever arms with angle markings, so that an
experimenter could rock the robot in time with a 120 beat
per minute signal generated by the Slick Metronome Android
application.
Two metrics were used to evaluate control performance.
For trajectory following performance, the root mean square
(RMS) joint error was used. This was calculated as the
difference between the desired joint position and the joint po-
sition sensed at the motor encoders. Modeling accuracy was
evaluated by calculating the RMS effort of the PD term as a
percentage of the RMS of the total control torque throughout
the observed trajectory. In static or semi-static poses, this
PD percentage should be very close to zero when gravity
compensation is enabled, as the gravity compensation term
should provide zero steady state error. Thus, this metric can
be useful in observing how accurate the compensation model
is. In trajectory tracking tasks, PD percentage can indicate
how helpful the gravity compensation term is. For instance,
if the PD percentage is much greater than 100%, then the PD
spends a signiﬁcant effort ﬁghting the gravity compensation
term, which indicates that gravity compensation is reducing
tracking performance.
V. RESULTS
A. Controller Validation
Initial validation testing was designed to ensure that the
calculated values of the gravity terms are correct. When the
robot base was at its nominal horizontal orientation, both the
dynamic gravity and static gravity calculated terms matched
the PD torque values at a variety of static tested positions.
As expected, the SG term became less accurate at increasing
base angles. Figure 8 shows the divergence of the two gravity
compensation terms.
Also as expected, the PD+DG performed more accurately
with changing base angles than the PD+SG and PD-only
controllers. The DG control term accounted for nearly all of
the total control torque and the PD did very little correcting
since the PD exerted nearly zero torque at almost all times
and the sum of the PD and DG terms followed very closely
2537
Fig. 7: Calculated gravity compensation terms compared
to PD torques at base angles of 0 and 25 degrees during
validation poses.
Fig. 8: PD term as a percentage of RMS torque in gravity
compensated controllers at increasing base angles during
validation poses.
to the DG term. However, the PD+SG controller required
more effort from the PD term in order to hold a pose with
increasing base angles. The stark contrast in performance
can be seen in Figure 8, which shows the RMS value of the
PD term as a percentage of total RMS torque throughout
the trajectory. This ﬁgure implies that the PD term needed
to contribute more overall effort due to inaccuracies in the
gravity compensation in the PD + SG controller at non-
horizontal angles.
Operating with only a DG term and no PD, the robot
passively held any new position manually imposed by the
experimenter. The majority of the resistance to motion in this
mode was apparently motor inertia and cable friction terms.
This effect is seen at all tested base orientations for the DG
term (even upside-down), but only at or near horizontal with
the SG term. Unlike the DG only controller, when the SG
only controlled robot was tipped more than a few degrees
the robot will drift due to the error in compensation.
B. Trajectory Following with Static Base Angles
As expected from the literature, in our experiments gravity
compensation did help tracking error. Figure 9 shows that
joint tracking error was improved by gravity compensation
for the ﬁrst joint, about which the base was tilted. At a
base angle of 20 degrees, the PD+DG controller’s RMS
Fig. 9: RMS joint angle errors in degrees for each controller
at each angle.
Fig. 10: RMS of joint angle error for the three controllers
during autonomous trajectory with rocking base.
joint 1 error was around 12% less than the error of the PD-
only controller. Tracking error with the PD+SG controller
increased at 20 degrees. At 20 degrees, the inaccuracy of the
gravity compensation term in the PD+SG controller negated
any improvements that it may have imparted. Joint 3 had
higher errors with gravity compensated control over PD-only
control.
C. Trajectory Following with Rocking Base
Under constantly varying base angles, the gravity compen-
sated controllers showed little collective effect on Cartesian
tracking performance. However, Figure 10 shows that joint
1 tracking performance increases by the same 12% as in the
static base angle tests.
VI. DISCUSSION
Our experiments validated the accuracy of a gravity torque
model of the RA VEN robot and showed that sensing the base
acceleration vector in real-time could be used to compensate
for base motion in addition to gravity.
Using a real-time value for the gravity vector in gravity
compensation calculation decreased the PD effort in regula-
tion and tracking tasks in applications where the robot base
pose is adjustable or subject to movement during operation.
This was due to the improved accuracy of computing gravity
loads as demonstrated in Figure 8. This ﬁgure demonstrates
that assuming a constant gravity vector required the PD term
to ”ﬁght” the inaccurate gravity term in order to achieve the
desired state.
Dynamic gravity compensation showed the same improve-
ments over static gravity compensation with a constantly
varying base angle as with statically increasing base angles.
2538
Joint 1 tracking performance improved with both types of
gravity compensation we implemented. This was likely due
to this joint having the highest imposed gravity torques since
it carries the mass of all subsequent links. This joint also acts
in parallel with the imposed rotations in testing, so it has the
most to gain from an accurate dynamic gravity compensation
term in these tests. Not only was the performance increased
with changing gravity direction, but also with changes in
acceleration magnitude.
Joint 3 performance, however, did not show signiﬁcant
improvements. This may be due to the different nature
of compensating for linear rails and the high degree of
cable coupling associated with the tool spindles on the tool
carriage.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
A feedforward dynamic gravity compensation term has
been shown to improve control performance when added to
a standard PD controller on the RA VEN robot. A practical
high-level algorithm was implemented that takes advantage
of low cost sensors to generalize gravity compensation to
base motion compensation.
Further studies can focus on other aspects of control
performance under varying base conditions, such as per-
turbations or sustained accelerations. The step-response of
the PD+DG controller under these conditions would provide
an interesting study. Furthermore, a study of the frequency
response of the system with the PD+DG controller could
show a case in which speciﬁc perturbations of the base
could create a positive feedback instability between the robot
motion and the accelerometer.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the members of the
BioRobotics lab for their assistance in this project. Speciﬁ-
cally, we would like to acknowledge Hawkeye King for his
invaluable assistance throughout the duration of the work.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Garcia, J. Rosen, C. Kapoor, M. Noakes, G. Elbert, M. Treat,
T. Ganous, M. Hanson, J. Manak, C. Hasser, D. Rohler, and R. Satava,
“Trauma pod: a semi-automated telerobotic surgical system,” The
International Journal of Medical Robotics and Computer Assisted
Surgery, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 136–146, 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/rcs.238
[2] M. Lum, D. Friedman, H. King, R. Donlin, G. Sankaranarayanan,
T. Broderick, M. Sinanan, J. Rosen, and B. Hannaford, “Teleoperation
of a surgical robot via airborne wireless radio and transatlantic
internet links,” in Field and Service Robotics, ser. Springer Tracts
in Advanced Robotics, C. Laugier and R. Siegwart, Eds. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, vol. 42, pp. 305–314.
[3] B. Hannaford, J. Rosen, D. Friedman, H. King, P. Roan, L. Cheng,
D. Glozman, J. Ma, S. Kosari, and L. White, “Raven-ii: An open
platform for surgical robotics research,” Biomedical Engineering,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 954–959, 2013.
[4] P. Tomei, “A simple pd controller for robots with elastic joints,”
Automatic Control, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 36, no. 10, pp. 1208–
1213, 1991.
[5] A. D. Luca, B. Siciliano, and L. Zollo, “fPDg control
with on-line gravity compensation for robots with elastic
joints: Theory and experiments,” Automatica, vol. 41,
no. 10, pp. 1809 – 1819, 2005. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S000510980500186X
[6] C. Wronka and M. Dunnigan, “Derivation and analysis
of a dynamic model of a robotic manipulator on a
moving base,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 59,
no. 10, pp. 758 – 769, 2011. [Online]. Available:
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0921889011000947
[7] E. Sadraei and M. Moghaddam, “On a moving base robotic manipu-
lator dynamics,” in Robotics and Mechatronics (ICRoM), 2013 First
RSI/ISM International Conference on, 2013, pp. 165–170.
[8] M. Dunnigan and C. Wronka, “Comparison of control techniques for a
robotic manipulator with base disturbances,” IET Control Theory and
Applications, vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 999–1012, 2011.
[9] K. Iagnemma, R. Burn, E. Wilhelm, and S. Dubowsky, “Experimental
validation of physics-based planning and control algorithms for plan-
etary robotic rovers,” in Experimental Robotics VI. Springer, 2000,
pp. 319–328.
[10] H. King, B. Hannaford, K.-W. Kwok, G.-Z. Yang, P. Grifﬁths, A. Oka-
mura, I. Farkhatdinov, J.-H. Ryu, G. Sankaranarayanan, V . Arikatla,
K. Tadano, K. Kawashima, A. Peer, T. Schauss, M. Buss, L. Miller,
D. Glozman, J. Rosen, and T. Low, “Plugfest 2009: Global interoper-
ability in telerobotics and telemedicine,” in Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2010 IEEE International Conference on, 2010, pp. 1733–
1738.
[11] H. H. King, S. Nia Kosari, B. Hannaford, and J. Ma, “Kinematic
analysis of the raven-ii research surgical robot platform,” University
of Washington and U.C. Santa Cruz, Tech. Rep., 2012.
2539
