Design of a Compliance Assisted Quadrupedal Amphibious Robot
Andrew R. V ogel
1
, Krishnanand N. Kaipa
2
, Gregory M. Krummel
3
,
Hugh A. Bruck
4
, and Satyandra K. Gupta
5
Abstract— This paper describes RoboTerp, a quadrupedal
amphibious robot that achieves locomotion on land and in water
with the same legs by switching gaits to match the terrain.
The central idea hinges on a passive compliant mechanism
attached to the lower leg that enables it to behave like a
valve during movement in water. The direction of this valve-like
mechanism is aligned such that rhythmic oscillations of the legs
generate a net thrust that propels the robot forward in water.
By design, this oscillatory leg movement achieves splash-free
swimming, and thereby overcomes the shortcomings of most
previous wheel-leg based designs, in which rotational movement
causes water splashing that leads to signiﬁcant turbulence in
the robot surroundings. We examined different materials and
morphological parameters to select the best ﬂap conﬁguration.
A modular design allowed rapid iterations of these experiments.
We conﬁrmed the performance of the best few conﬁgurations
found during the experiments through ﬂuid simulations. Finally,
we report successful demonstrations of RoboTerp walking on
asphalt land, swimming in a pool, and transitioning between
uneven rock surface and water in an outdoor creek.
I. INTRODUCTION
Mobile robots used in outdoor applications?search, res-
cue, and monitoring?are traditionally designed to handle
complexities of a single terrain (either land or water). As
the design requirements signiﬁcantly differ from one ter-
rain to another, terrestrial robots fail to operate in water;
likewise, purely aquatic robots are unable to locomote on
land. Although aerial robots can hover over land and water,
considerable tree cover typically present in semi-aquatic
regions like swamps and creeks limits their operational
effectiveness to a great extent. These issues and a growing
demand for amphibious robots have motivated researchers to
ﬁnd solutions to amphibious robotic locomotion recently.
Nature provides a primary source of inspiration: amphibi-
ous animals and insects have evolved particular morpholog-
ical, biomechanical, and control structures that enable them
to navigate effortlessly on both land and water. Accordingly,
there have been some research attempts over the past decade
to build robots that replicate mechanisms of amphibious
1
Andrew V ogel is a graduate student at the Department of Me-
chanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
avogel2@umd.edu
2
Krishnanand Kaipa is a Research Assistant Professor at the Department
of Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD,
USA kkrishna@umd.edu
3
Gregory Krummel is an undergraduate student at the Department of
Mechanical Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USA
g.m.krummel@gmail.com
4
Hugh Bruck is a Professor at the Department of Mechanical Engineer-
ing, University of Maryland, College Park, MD, USAbruck@umd.edu
5
Satyandra Gupta is a Professor at the Department of Mechanical
Engineering and Institute for Systems Research, University of Maryland,
College Park, MD, USA skgupta@umd.edu
Fig. 1. RoboTerp navigating in an outdoor creek.
locomotion found in nature [1], [2], [3], [4], [5], [6]. Further,
purely engineering based solutions have been pursued to
some extent [7], [8], [9], [10].
However, the design of amphibious robots still presents
several important open ended challenges: (1) Separate mech-
anisms (e.g., wheels/legs for land and ﬁns/paddles for water)
can be combined to achieve amphibious capability in robots.
However, without a careful design, this method can become
cumbersome and inefﬁcient due to an increase in the number
of actuators. This raises the question of whether actuated and
passive members can be integrated into a single mechanism
to produce amphibious propulsion. (2) Waterprooﬁng is a
principal design requirement for a robot operating in aquatic
terrains and must be addressed head on. (3) A detailed study
of how different conﬁgurations?body plans, materials, and
gaits?impact locomotion efﬁciency (by using ﬂuid simula-
tions and experiments involving thrust measurements) must
be carried out in order to select the best conﬁguration for
the robot. This calls for a modular design that allows rapid
iterations of all variants of the physical platform.
In this paper, we present the design of RoboTerp, a
quadrupedal amphibious robot that achieves locomotion on
land and in water with the same legs by switching gaits
to match the terrain. In most earlier amphibious robots
based on either compliant legs or wheel-leg mechanisms, the
legs rotate in order to generate propulsion in water. During
each rotation cycle, the legs lift off from the water surface
into the air and splash back into the water. This causes
signiﬁcant disruptive turbulence in the surroundings of the
robot. Therefore, we have taken a different approach. Our leg
mechanism is designed in such a way that rather than using
a rotational motion, it uses an oscillatory motion in order
to generate forward thrust in water. This thereby allows it
to perform splash-free swimming. In particular, the central
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2378
idea hinges on a passive compliant appendage attached to
the lower leg structure that enables it to behave like a valve
in the presence of water. The direction of this valve-like
mechanism is aligned such that rhythmic oscillations of all
the four legs generate a net forward thrust that enables the
robot to transition to, and perform, surface swimming in
semi-aquatic terrains.
We examined different combinations of materials (ﬂap
thickness and hardness) and morphological factors (orien-
tations of ﬂap and knee axes) in order to select the best
conﬁguration of the compliant ﬂap mechanism. We con-
ﬁrmed the performance of the best few conﬁgurations found
during the experiments through ﬂuid simulations. Successful
physical demonstrations involving walking on asphalt land,
swimming in a pool, and transitioning gaits between uneven
rock surface and water in an outdoor creek validate the
robot’s effectiveness in real terrains.
II. RELATED WORK
ACM-R5 [2], a snake-like robot achieved locomotion both
in water and on land by using undulation and wheels on
independent segments. Amphibot [3], [11], [12], another
snake-like robot, similarly used undulation in conjunction
with passive wheels in order to crawl on land and swim
in water. The passive wheels of Amphibot were replaced by
four simple legs to give rise to a Salamander-like amphibious
robot [13] that was capable of terrestrial motion and surf-
zone transition. Another AmphiRobot [4] used composite
propulsion (comprising body undulations, a wheel-propeller-
ﬁn mechanism in the front, and a caudal ﬁn in the rear) to
achieve a ﬁsh-like swimming pattern.
RHex [14], a highly rugged hexapod, used compliant legs
with only six actuated degrees of freedom. Several variants
of this six-legged robot were built to produce amphibious
propulsion: In the ﬁrst version of AQUA [5], [15], the rigid
legs of RHex had to be manually replaced by paddles for the
sake of swimming. In the second version, the same compliant
ﬂippers were used for propulsion in both land and water.
However, this had a signiﬁcant negative impact on its ability
to walk.
AmphiHex-I [6], inspired by AQUA, attempted to rec-
tify these shortcomings by using transformable leg-ﬂippers
that could actively switch between curved shaped legs (for
propulsion on land) and straight shaped paddles (for propul-
sion in water). ASGUARD [9] eschewed RHex’s six legs in
favor of four wheel-like spokes, which granted it signiﬁcant
mobility on land and some motion while ﬂoating on water,
albeit at the cost of signiﬁcant water disturbance. Whegs [7],
[8] used wheel-legs to walk on both land and the ocean ﬂoor,
and to swim over obstacles. eQuad [10] used a combination
of eccentric paddles and wheels to achieve locomotion in
both terrestrial and aquatic terrains.
In all the above examples based on either compliant legs
or wheel-leg mechanisms, the legs rotate in order to generate
propulsion in water. As mentioned earlier, this causes a dis-
ruptive turbulence in the surroundings of the robot. However,
our leg mechanism uses an oscillatory motion in order to
Fig. 2. (a) 3D model of RoboTerp in a outside-front and outside-back
conﬁguration. (b) Close-up view of the leg design (The ﬂap is removed to
reveal the interior structure of the leg).
Fig. 3. Trot gait used by RoboTerp to walk on land. For each foot, a white
circle next to it indicates that the foot is in air and a white dot indicates
that it is on ground.
generate forward thrust in water. This thereby allows it to
perform splash-free swimming. A simple, efﬁcient method of
changing between terrestrial to aquatic locomotion is used so
that the robot is positioned effectively to resume movement
post-transition.
III. PHYSICAL ROBOT
A snapshot of RoboTerp in a creek is shown in Fig. 1.
A 3D model (Fig. 2) is used to illustrate its mechanical
construction: the robot structure consists of (1) a main
body that serves as a waterproof casing for the electronics,
(2) four legs?each with two actuated joints and a passive
compliant ﬂap?designed for amphibious locomotion, and
(3) a rectangular chassis that houses the main body and
the four legs. High-torque waterproofed servo motors with
ingress protection from submersion in water are employed;
all remaining electronics are protected within a waterproofed
casing. Transition from land to water and vice versa is
sensed by exposed electrical contacts that close (open) a
circuit in the presence (absence) of water, typically found in
creeks, ponds, and lakes. Additionally, three bump-activated
switches were added on the front of the robot to facilitate
transition from water to land. These sensors and all eight
servomotors are interfaced to an Arduino Mega 2560 mi-
crocontroller. The robot is powered by a 6-volt, 2000 mAh
nickel metal hydride battery (for servomotors) and a 9-volt
alkaline battery (for Arduino). The robot weighs 1.72 kg. The
footprint of the robot is 29.2 cm ? 20.0 cm. The robot can
operate for roughly 20 minutes on a single battery charge.
A. Leg Design for Amphibious Locomotion
The main idea behind the design of the leg mechanism
lies in the fact that the same legs that achieve locomotion
on land using one gait, also provide propulsion in water by
switching to a different gait. First, we describe the part of
the leg mechanism that achieves walking.
2379
Fig. 4. Walking gait used by RoboTerp to move in shallow waters.
Fig. 5. Swimming gait used by RoboTerp to move in deep waters.
Design of rigid legs for walking: Each leg is based on
a simple two DOF design that is well examined in the
literature. The leg conﬁguration is shown in Fig. 2(b). Each
leg consists of two actuated joints: (a) Hip: The hip joint
is located close to the body and allows the robot to sweep
the leg from backward to forward and vice versa. (b) Knee:
The knee joint is suspended at the end of the upper leg and
allows the robot to lift the lower leg off the ground during
recovery phase. As shown in the ﬁgure, the lower leg is both
unusually shaped and longer than the upper leg; although
these morphological properties do not affect walking, they
facilitate the swimming mechanism, which is explained next.
Design of compliant mechanism for swimming: The com-
pliant ﬂap attached to the lower leg (Fig. 2(a)) uses a valve-
like mechanism to generate forward thrust. For this purpose,
the hip joint is actuated, while the knee joint motion is
frozen. Now, as the leg performs a forward stroke (this
relates to the sweep movement in the horizontal plane from
front to back of the robot), the interaction with water causes
the ﬂap to snap to the ﬂanged leg frame, thereby resisting
any water ﬂow through the interior of the lower leg. The
resulting reaction force propels the body forward. However,
as the leg performs a recovery stroke (sweep movement in
the horizontal plane from back to front), the ﬂap deforms
away from the leg, thereby allowing water ﬂow through the
interior of the lower leg. The effect of this is to avoid drag
during the recovery stroke. Therefore, each swimming gait
cycle consists of a forward stroke and a backward stroke with
a net forward thrust, maintained through repeated oscillation.
B. Design of Gaits
Three primary gaits of trotting, walking, and swimming
are created for locomotion on land, in shallow water that is
not deep enough for ﬂoatation, and in deep water. Handling
these particular situations are essential to operating in semi-
aquatic terrains. The trotting and walking gaits each have
a 150 ms delay between two steps, and the swimming gait
has a 250 ms delay between two steps. Two transition gaits
are also synthesized for the purpose of aiding the change
Fig. 6. Parameters used to evaluate differnt morphological conﬁgurations.
between walking/trotting and swimming.
As can be seen in Fig 3, trotting is a four-step gait which
has either two or four feet on the ground during any given
step. Diagonal leg pairs act in tandem as the feet take up a
triangular motion pattern. In less steady conditions, such as
walking in shallow water, stability is more of a priority than
speed. The walking gait (Fig. 4) is similar to the trotting gait
in terms of the triangular foot movement, but different in that
there is no symmetry to it: each leg is at a different place in
the four-step triangular pattern at any given time. This allows
the robot to have three feet on the walking surface at any
time, which greatly increases stability in an unsteady terrain.
The swimming gait involves sweeping the legs back and forth
and using compliance in order to create a net forward thrust.
Speciﬁcally, as shown in Fig. 5, the knee joints are frozen,
while the hip joints oscillate. The front legs and back legs
operate symmetrically to avoid incidental movement from
side to side while swimming.
The purpose of land-to-water transition gait is to establish
an initial four-legged push to create initial forward velocity
and to clear away from land. All four legs are placed forward
and then propelled backward before the back legs are posi-
tioned in the conﬁguration used for swimming. During water-
to-land transition, the robot must be able to pull itself on
whatever surface is detected on the shore. For this purpose,
each front leg is lifted up and moved forward before both
legs are retracted to propel the robot out of the water.
IV. ANALYSIS OF COMPLIANT MECHANISM
A. Design Variants
Different combinations of parameters like ﬂap thickness,
ﬂap hardness, ﬂap axis, and knee axis were examined in
order to select the best conﬁguration of the compliant ﬂap
2380
Fig. 7. Forward propulsion thrust results for various combinations of design parameters.
mechanism. These design iterations were carried out exper-
imentally; the performance of the best few conﬁgurations
found during the experiments were conﬁrmed through ﬂuid
simulations.
The four parameters and their values are shown in Fig. 6.
The ﬂaps are made of silicone rubber. With the exception
of 2.38 mm / 10A durometer rubber (absent due to supplier
availability) all other combinations shown in the ﬁgure were
considered. Two lower leg designs that support a horizontal
ﬂap axis and a vertical ﬂap axis, respectively, were con-
sidered. Two orientations of the knee axis were considered.
In particular, an inside conﬁguration points the servomotor
spline axis of the knee joint toward the center of the robot,
while an outside conﬁguration points servomotor spline axis
away from the robot. This is important with respect to the
direction of compliance relative to the knee motor housing:
inside-front and outside-back conﬁgurations have the com-
pliant direction pointed away from the motor housing, while
the outside-front and inside-back conﬁgurations let the ﬂaps
bend toward the motor housing during recovery. Whereas
the ﬁnal robot used an outside-front and outside-back con-
ﬁguration (as shown in Fig. 2(a)) to achieve simplicity in
balancing for terrestrial movement, experimental evaluations
of inside conﬁgurations were deemed useful for the sake of
identifying possible trends in the results.
B. Experimental Setup
The thrust produced by the legs was measured by placing
the robot in a tub of water with one end connected by a
5 lb, one DOF force sensor to the edge of the tub. To
compensate as much as possible for vertical bobbing, the
force sensor was attached to the tub wall at the equilibrium
point for ﬂoating. While horizontal motion was not explicitly
restrained, the symmetrical nature of the swimming motion
limited signiﬁcant horizontal drifting during testing. For the
purpose of determining relative contribution of front and
back leg pairs, each pair was tested separately, by freezing
the motion of the other pair of legs.
Each test was ten seconds long, with the force sensor
taking measurements at a rate of 1kHz. The measurements
were recorded using LabVIEW. In the interest of avoiding
any initial transients and measuring only the steady-state
oscillations, data during the ﬁrst second (correspondingly,
the ﬁrst thousand data points) were discarded. The remaining
9000 data points were used in the force calculations. A
baseline test was used to determine the conversion factor,
which was then used to convert the voltage measurements
from the sensor into force measurements.
C. Experimental Results
The thrust results are shown in Fig. 7. Performances of all
tested conﬁgurations are presented in the same graph for an
easier comparison between design variants. In particular, the
results are divided into four sets according to inside-back,
outside-back, inside-front, and outside-front conﬁgurations,
respectively. Further, in each set, the results for horizontal
ﬂap-axis and vertical ﬂap-axis are presented next to each
other in two subsets. Each subset consists of four groups
(corresponding to four thickness values of the ﬂap), with
three bars in each group (corresponding to three hardness
2381
Fig. 8. (a) Anti-spline thrust absolute velocity proﬁle varies from 0 to 506
mm/s. (b) Anti-spline thrust directional velocity proﬁle varies from -150 to
472 mm/s. (c) Pro-spline thrust absolute velocity proﬁle varies from 0 to
433 mm/s. (d) Pro-spline thrust directional velocity proﬁle varies from -470
to 150 mm/s. (e) Anti-spline recovery absolute velocity proﬁle varies from 0
to 578 mm/s. (f) Anti-spline recovery directional velocity proﬁle varies from
-472 to 150 mm/s. (g) Pro-spline recovery absolute velocity proﬁle varies
from 0 to 650 mm/s. (h) Pro-spline recovery directional velocity proﬁle
varies from -61 to 650 mm/s.
values of the ﬂap). Note that there are only two bars for
each 2.4 mm combination as the 2.4 mm/10A ﬂap was not
tested due to reasons mentioned in Section IV A.
The primary conclusion from this set of results was that
the performance of ﬂaps with horizontal-axis was better
than that of ﬂaps with vertical-axis in most cases. This
is true in general for the three conﬁgurations of inside-
back, inside-front, and outside-front. Note that in the case of
outside-back conﬁguration, the performances of horizontal
and vertical conﬁgurations are comparable to each other.
Further, inside-front and outside-back legs performed better
than outside-front and inside-back legs. Among the thickness
and hardness combinations, the 1.59 mm /40 A durometer
and 2.38 mm / 40 A durometer ﬂaps performed the best. The
thrust contributions of the front and back legs were found to
be approximately equal. The negative thrust for the vertical
outside-front conﬁguration is likely due to an extremely low
thrust combined with reﬂection-based errors.
D. Simulation Setup
To verify these results, the two rubber types that performed
best were selected for further exploration via ﬂuid simulation.
This was performed using SolidWorks 2012’s ﬂow simula-
tion package. For this purpose, a static leg model constructed
in Pro Engineer with bending ﬂaps represented by a series
of two static plates placed at the same angle was considered
with the water ﬂow in a manner representative of the water
ﬂowing around the leg as it propels the robot in still water.
The oscillation velocity V
O
was calculated by multiplying
the observed oscillation frequency f (= 2.34 Hz), the 120
o
oscillation cycle converted to 2.09 radians, and the radius
r at any point. The forward velocity V
F
was calculated by
observation of previous models. Combined, they created the
total thrust velocity V
T
and total recovery velocity V
R
; these
equations were used to model the ﬂow in the simulations.
The magnitude of velocity operates under the convention that
positive velocity is in the direction of robot motion, while a
negative sign opposes the direction of motion.
|V
O
| = 4.89? r mm/s (1)
V
F
= 71.882 mm/s (2)
V
T
= 4.89r?71.882 mm/s (3)
V
R
= ?4.89r?71.882 mm/s (4)
As with the experimental testing, the two rubber types
were tested with each combination of ﬂap axis, knee axis,
and leg pair; outside-back and inside-front conﬁgurations
were combined into a group designated as pro-spline. Like-
wise, outside-front and inside-back conﬁgurations were com-
bined into an anti-spline group. Each ﬂap surface was
considered as a smooth surface at a roughness of 0 micro
inches. Pressure and temperature were set to 1 atmosphere
and 20.05 degrees celsius, respectively.
E. Simulation Results
Simulations results coincided with experimental ﬁndings.
Horizontal-axis ﬂaps outperformed vertical-axis ﬂaps, while
pro-spline conﬁgurations outperformed anti-spline conﬁg-
urations for both thrust and recovery. Both absolute and
directional velocities were examined. The comparison of
anti-spline and pro-spline can be seen in Fig. 8(a?h). It can
be observed that the absolute and directional velocities of
water upon the ﬂap are greater for pro-spline conﬁgurations
compared to anti-spline. This holds for both thrust and
recovery and lends itself to more responsive, and thus more
efﬁcient, compliant mechanisms. The perceived reason for
this difference was diffusion of incoming water by the motor
housing in anti-spline conﬁgurations.
Based on the above analysis, the conﬁguration chosen for
the ﬁnal prototype of RoboTerp used a leg design with a
horizontal ﬂap axis. Inside-front and outside-back legs per-
formed better in the experiments. This was also conﬁrmed in
simulations (pro-spline conﬁguration). However, this choice
was less feasible due to the necessity of symmetrical legs for
walking balance. Therefore, the ﬁnal robot used outside-front
and outside-back legs. Both ﬂaps with thickness/hardness
2382
Fig. 9. (a?d) RoboTerp walking on land (asphalt surface). (e?h) RoboTerp
swimming in a neutral buoyancy tank.
Fig. 10. (a) RoboTerp tested in an outdoor creek. (b?d) RoboTerp
transitioning from land to water and swimming thereafter.
combinations of 1.59 mm /40 A durometer and 2.38 mm
/ 40 A durometer were selected for ﬁnal testing.
V. FIELD TESTING
RoboTerp was tested in a variety of terrains. Initially, the
robot was made to walk on asphalt land. Figures 9(a?d)
shows snapshots from a video footage of RoboTerp walking
successfully on asphalt land. Next, the surface swimming
capability of RoboTerp was tested in a neutral buoyancy
tank (Fig. 9(e?h)). Finally, RoboTerp was tested for walking,
swimming, and transitioning in an outdoor creek (Fig. 10(a)).
Figure 10(b?f) shows snapshots from a video footage of
RoboTerp walking on a rock, switching to a swimming gait
as it transitions into water, and swimming thereafter.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We developed a low-cost amphibious robot with mainly
off-the-shelf components. The robot achieved splash-free
swimming by utilizing compliance assisted legs and os-
cillatory leg movements. This reduces energy needed for
swimming. We designed and demonstrated appropriate walk-
ing and swimming gaits. We integrated sensors to trigger
transition between swimming and walking and successfully
demonstrated transition between walking and swimming
using sensors. Future direction of work will include (1)
development of minimal energy gaits, (2) concurrent gait
and ﬂap optimization to increase forward velocity, and (3)
integration of vision-based sensors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dr. S.K. Gupta’s participation in this research was sup-
ported by National Science Foundation’s Independent Re-
search and Development program.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Ijspeert, A. Crespi, D. Ryczko, and J.-M. Cabelguen, “From
swimming to walking with a salamander robot driven by a spinal cord
model,” Science, vol. 315, no. 5817, pp. 1416–1420, 2007.
[2] S. Hirose and H. Yamada, “Snake-like robots [tutorial],” Robotics and
Automation Magazine, IEEE, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 88–98, 2009.
[3] A. Crespi, A. Badertscher, A. Guignard, and A. Ijspeert, “Swim-
ming and crawling with an amphibious snake robot,” in Robotics
and Automation, 2005. ICRA 2005. Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE
International Conference on, 2005, pp. 3024–3028.
[4] R. Ding, J. Yu, Q. Yang, M. Tan, and J. Zhang, “Robust gait control
in biomimetic amphibious robot using central pattern generator,” in
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on, 2010, pp. 3067–3072.
[5] G. Dudek, P. Giguere, C. Prahacs, S. Saunderson, J. Sattar, L. Torres-
Mendez, M. Jenkin, A. German, A. Hogue, A. Ripsman, J. Zacher,
E. Milios, H. Liu, P. Zhang, M. Buehler, and C. Georgiades, “Aqua: An
amphibious autonomous robot,” Computer, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 46–53,
2007.
[6] X. Liang, M. Xu, L. Xu, P. Liu, X. Ren, Z. Kong, J. Yang, and
S. Zhang, “The amphihex: A novel amphibious robot with trans-
formable leg-ﬂipper composite propulsion mechanism,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, 2012, pp. 3667–3672.
[7] A. Boxerbaum, P. Werk, R. Quinn, and R. Vaidyanathan, “Design
of an autonomous amphibious robot for surf zone operation: part i
mechanical design for multi-mode mobility,” in Advanced Intelligent
Mechatronics. Proceedings, 2005 IEEE/ASME International Confer-
ence on, 2005, pp. 1459–1464.
[8] R. Harkins, J. Ward, R. Vaidyanathan, A. Boxerbaum, and R. Quinn,
“Design of an autonomous amphibious robot for surf zone opera-
tions: part ii - hardware, control implementation and simulation,” in
Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics. Proceedings, 2005 IEEE/ASME
International Conference on, 2005, pp. 1465–1470.
[9] M. Eich, F. Grimminger, and F. Kirchner, “A versatile stair-climbing
robot for search and rescue applications,” in Safety, Security and
Rescue Robotics, 2008. SSRR 2008. IEEE International Workshop on,
2008, pp. 35–40.
[10] Y . Sun and S. Ma, “Decoupled kinematic control of terrestrial lo-
comotion for an epaddle-based reconﬁgurable amphibious robot,” in
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2011 IEEE International Conference
on, 2011, pp. 1223–1228.
[11] A. Ijspeert and A. Crespi, “Online trajectory generation in an amphibi-
ous snake robot using a lamprey-like central pattern generator model,”
in Robotics and Automation, 2007 IEEE International Conference on,
2007, pp. 262–268.
[12] A. Crespi and A. Ijspeert, “Online optimization of swimming and
crawling in an amphibious snake robot,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions
on, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 75–87, 2008.
[13] A. Crespi, K. Karakasiliotis, A. Guignard, and A. Ijspeert, “Salaman-
dra robotica ii: an amphibious robot to study salamander-like swim-
ming and walking gaits,” Robotics, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 29,
no. 2, pp. 308–320, April 2013.
[14] E. Z. Moore, D. Campbell, F. Grimminger, and M. Buehler, “Reliable
stair climbing in the simple hexapod ’rhex’,” in Robotics and Automa-
tion, 2002. Proceedings. ICRA ’02. IEEE International Conference on,
vol. 3, 2002, pp. 2222–2227.
[15] J. Sattar, P. Giguere, G. Dudek, and C. Prahacs, “A visual servoing
system for an aquatic swimming robot,” in Intelligent Robots and
Systems, 2005. (IROS 2005). 2005 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, 2005, pp. 1483–1488.
2383
