On the design of a robot-assisted rehabilitation system for ankle joint
with contracture and/or spasticity based on proprioceptive
neuromuscular facilitation
Zhihao Zhou, Yuan Zhou, Ninghua Wang, Fan Gao, Kunlin Wei and Qining Wang, Member, IEEE
Abstract— Ankle joint with contracture and/or spasticity can
severely disable the mobility and the independence of stroke
survivors. Robot-assisted rehabilitation has been proposed to
support physicians in providing effective therapies. In this
paper, we propose a robot-assisted ankle rehabilitation system
integrated with human-computer interaction interface and
acquisition of Electromyography signals, joint torque and joint
angle. Furthermore, we investigate the effects of proprioceptive
neuromuscular facilitation (PNF) rehabilitation method applied
in our robotic system. The proposed robot-assisted system has
been used in real experiments and provides PNF rehabilitation
to ﬁve stroke patients for six weeks. Preliminary experimental
results suggest that PNF is effective in increasing ankle range
of motion(ROM), decreasing ankle resistance torque, and alle-
viating joint stiffness.
I. INTRODUCTION
Human ankle joint, as a ﬂexible and complex skele-
tal structure in human body, plays an important role in
providing forward propulsion force during terminal stance
phase and maintaining body balance during the whole gait
cycle [1]–[3]. Cerebrovascular accident, or stroke, is one of
the leading causes of ankle disability [4], [5]. One of the
greatest challenges in stroke survivors’ rehabilitation is to
cure the lower limb with contracture and/or spasticity [6]–
[10]. Spasticity is resulted from the hypertonus and reﬂex
hyperactivity of ﬂexor muscles. It reduces the joint range
of motion and may cause severe physical pain. Lack of
mobilization and prolonged spasticity may further change the
structure of muscle ﬁbers and connective tissues and ﬁnally
lead to permanent contracture as a result. About 34% of
stroke survivors have developed ankle contracture [10]–[12].
Therefore, ankle contracture and/or spasticity can seriously
inﬂuence its normal functional activities.
Previous studies have presented that ankle joint with
contracture and/or spasticity is generally rehabilitated via
physiotherapy [13]–[15]. During the treatment, patient’s an-
kle is manually moved within its range of motion (ROM)
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (No. 61005082, 61020106005), the National High Technology Re-
search and Development Program of China (863 Program, 2012AA011602),
and the 985 Project of Peking University (No. 3J0865600).
Z. Zhou and Q. Wang are with the Intelligent Control Laboratory,
College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. (e-mail:
qiningwang@pku.edu.cn)
Y . Zhou and N. Wang are with the Department of Rehabilitation
Medicine, First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing 100034, China.
K. Wei is with the Department of Psychology, Peking University, Beijing
100871, China. (e-mail: kunlin.wei@pku.edu.cn)
F. Gao is with the Department of Health Care Sciences, University of
Texas Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, USA.
by physical therapists. Physical rehabilitation is a long-
term continuous operation. Short-term treatment is usually
insufﬁcient to make patients fully recuperation [16]. Even
if the patients have temporarily recovered from short-term
treatment, they tend to relapse and have future problems
[13], [17]. In addition, manual stretching is very laborious
and strenuous to physical therapists. The effects of manual
rehabilitation may not last long , partly due to the limitation
of stretching frequency and duration time. For some severe
patients, their ankle joints have a very high stiffness and can
hardly be stretched by therapists, even with strong arms.
Robot-assisted rehabilitation has been proposed to support
physicians in providing high-intensity therapy for the im-
paired limb [18]. Robotic technology can transform rehabili-
tation from labor-intensive operations to technology-assisted
operations which can implement kinds of rehabilitation meth-
ods [19]. The robot-assisted system can offer an adequate
stretching force and sustaining long-term training, which
can cover the limitation of manual stretching. It can also
record rich information, such as velocity, ROM, resistance
torque, and electromyography (EMG) signal, which can
facilitate patient diagnosis, functional assessment, therapy
customization and rehabilitation history recording. Robot-
assisted rehabilitation is gradually being thought to be as
good as or even better than manual therapy [20].
Thus, several research groups have developed some robot-
assisted rehabilitation systems [21]. Continuous passive mo-
tion (CPM) is mainly applied in those systems [22]–[25]. It
has been conﬁrmed in their studies that passive stretching
is effective in treating the ankle joint with spasticity and/or
contracture. CPM devices can provide regular and consistent
passive stretching. The ankle joint is moved between two
prescribe positions which usually not cover the whole ankle
ROM. Therefore, calf muscle may not be fully stretched into
the extreme position of dorsiﬂexion where the contracture
and/or spasticity is signiﬁcant. Meanwhile, with the concern
of safety, the range of passive stretching could not be set
too aggressively since the joint position is controlled without
incorporating the joint resisting torque. Then an intelligent
ankle stretching device was developed and successfully used
in physical experiments [22], [25]. The stretching velocity is
inversely proportional to the joint resistance torque. However,
since lower limb is totally relaxed during passive stretching,
the improvement of muscle strength and coordination are
limited.
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation (PNF), as a
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 736
Fig. 1. The proposed robot-assisted ankle rehabilitation system. It consists of immobile base, leg support, sliding platform, control cabinet and surface
EMG acquisition system.
novel treatment technique, is ﬁrst proposed by Kabat and
Knott for the rehabilitation of polio patients with paralysis
[26]. Klein et al. ﬁnds that PNF treatment in elderly will
signiﬁcantly improve ﬂexibility, ROM, strength and ADL
function [27]. The PNF is even found effective to increase
muscle volume and alter muscle ﬁber types [28]. Compared
to passive stretching, PNF technique is more effective [29].
Therefore, it could be an effective treatment in alleviating
ankle joint contracture and/or spasticity. More importantly,
this technique may improve stroke survivors’ functional
performance, such as walking or balance control.
In this paper, we developed a robot-assisted ankle reha-
bilitation system for the ankle joint with contracture and/or
spasticity. Furthermore, we applied PNF to the ankle rehabil-
itation system for investigating its effects. The effectiveness
of the rehabilitation system is evaluated by treatment of
joint spasticity and/or contracture for ﬁve stroke patients.
Treatment outcome is quantitatively evaluated in multiple
aspect of ankle joint biomechanics.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
describe the design of the robot-assisted ankle rehabilitation
system. PNF and experiment protocol are illustrated in
Section III. Performance of the proposed robot-assisted ankle
rehabilitation system and effectiveness of PNF stretching are
shown by experimental results in Section IV . We conclude
in Section V .
II. ROBOT-ASSISTED ANKLE REHABILITATION SYSTEM
A. Mechanical Design
The proposed robot-assisted ankle rehabilitation system
consists of an immobile base that contains a seat, a motor
suite and its controller, an adjustable sliding platform in
two degrees of freedom which is used to move the motor
bracket to an appropriate position, an adjustable leg support
(see Fig. 1). The motor is ﬁxed on the sliding platform. The
leg support can be adjusted in four degrees of freedom and
the leg is strapped to the leg support by the leg belt. The
adjustable sliding platform and leg support together ensure
that ankle axis is aligned with the motor shaft with knee
ﬂexed at a ﬁxed angle position. They are all locked by the
lock plungers after being adjusted to the desired position.
For safety, rotation limits of the footplate are set in the motor
drive and control module. The system will stop running if the
obliquity of the footplate is out of the prescribed range. In
addition, a mechanical limit stop is set to constrain the range
of motion. The motor bracket with location holes on the
perimeter is used to place the mechanical limit stop. Besides,
the operator and the subject all have their own emergency
switches and either of them could shut down the motor by
pressing their switches.
Fig. 2. Schematics diagram of the motor suite and the footplate.
As shown in Fig.2, the motor is ﬁxed on the motor bracket
and the footplate is ﬁxed on the motor shaft through the side
plate. The motor suite consists of a DC motor and an inline
gearbox with a 250:1 gear ratio which increases the loading
capacity of the motor up to 100 Nm. It also has a inline
737
Fig. 3. The signal ﬂow diagram of the proposed rehabilitation system.
rotation encoder for speed control. The motor is controlled
by a motor drive which is self-designed. Two stop pins on
the motor bracket are used for limiting the rotation range
of the swing pin, which is ﬁxed on the motor shaft. The
separation angle of two adjacent location holes is 10 degree.
Additionally, the footplate can move along the side plate.
First, we measure the length of the lower leg and height of
foot (distance from the bottom of foot to the lateral malleous)
which is represented by D
0
. Before the ankle is placed on
the footplate, we adjust the footplate position depending on
D
0
to ensure footplate rotating axis is aligned with the ankle
ﬂexion axis. The foot is secured on the footplate by Velcro
at the dorsal foot and the heel.
One uni-axial torque sensor is mounted on the shaft to
measure the torque signal. The underneath of footplate is
attached with an inclinometer which can record the joint
angle with the reference to the ground (see Fig. 3). Torque,
obliquity signal, encoder signal and EMG signal are fed into
the Labview program through a USB Data Acquisition(DAQ)
Card with the sampling rate at 1000Hz. Thereinto, the
resistance torque and the joint angle are simply processed
through a second order butterworth low-pass ﬁlter with a
cut-off frequency of 20 Hz. The raw EMG signals are ﬁrstly
bandpass ﬁltered through a fourth order butterworth ﬁlter
with a cutoff frequency of 20 Hz and 450 Hz, then full-wave
rectiﬁed, and low-pass ﬁltered through another fourth order
butterworth ﬁlter with a cutoff frequency of 5 Hz. Then it
is ﬁltered by moving average with a window length of two
hundred sample points. The processed EMG also need to
subtracts the measured offset when the muscle is relaxed.
Therapists control the motor through a customized Labview
program. Torque and normalized EMG signal are presented
on another screen. Patient can adjusted the activation of
his/her soleus according the graphical feedback.
B. Control System
The robot-assisted ankle rehabilitation system is driven by
a DC motor which is controlled by a self-designed driver. It
implements a double closed-loop system with the current as
the inner-loop and the speed as the outer-loop (see Fig. 4).
In the outer-loop, V
d
and V
r
are the desired speed and the
real-time speed from encoder, respectively. Input of speed
Fig. 4. Control ﬂow diagram of the ankle rehabilitation system.
controller is4V and output is I
d
which serves as the input
of current closed-loop. In the inner-loop, I
a
represents the
motor armature current. Input of current controller is4I and
output is PWM. Then PWM is used to control the motor.
The velocity is controlled in such a way that the speed is
inversely proportional to the resistance torque. Thus, when
the position of the ankle joint gets closed to the extreme
position of ROM, the increasing resistance slows down the
motor gradually and at the same time the muscle-tendons
involved are stretched slowly and safely. In the middle
of ROM where the resistance is usually low, the motor
stretches the slack muscles at higher speed. Certainly, if the
resistance is high in the middle, the movement will also be
slowed down accordingly. Speciﬁcally, the following rules
are implemented in the driver to control the motor where
µ(t) and T(t) are the position of the ankle ﬂexion and the
resistance torque at time t, respectively. µ
d
and µ
p
are the
extreme position of the joint ROM in ankle dorsiﬂexion and
plantarﬂexion, respectively(both are positive numbers). T
p
is
a speciﬁed peak resistance torque when the motor reaches the
mechanical stops. If T(t) is beyond the T
p
, the system will
shut down immediately as a kind of self-protection. It can
serve as a safe value to protect the patient and the system.
V
min
and V
max
(two positive numbers) are the minimum
and maximum speeds (for stretching in the middle of ROM)
which are predetermined, respectively. C
1
and C
2
are two
constants. C
2
scales the 1=T(t) to the appropriate stretching
velocity.
When the position µ
t
is in the middle of ROM, the motor
velocity V
t
is calculated by
V(t)=
8
>
>
<
>
>
:
V
min
V
t
6V
min
C
1
+
C
2
jT(t)j
V
min
<V
t
<V
max
V
max
V
t
>V
max
(1)
T(t) is resistance torque. It is calculated by
T(t)=T
m
(t)¡T
s
(t)¡T
f
(t) (2)
where T
m
is the value of the torque sensor, T
s
is the system
inertia and T
f
is relate to weight of the foot.
When the position µ
t
reaches the end of ROM, namely
µ
d
or µ
p
, the motor velocity V
t
is 0. The motor driver
implements a position close-loop by PI controller and current
loop also serves as the inner-loop.
738
(a) Direct hold-relax PNF
(b) Indirect hold-relax PNF
Fig. 5. Principles of two kind of PNF methods. Direct hold-relax PNF and indirect hold-relax PNF are shown in subﬁgure (a) and (b), respectively.
III. METHOD
A. Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation (PNF)
Proprioception means ’sense of self’. In human limbs,
the proprioceptor provides information about joint angles,
muscle length, and muscle tension, which give information
about the position of the limb in space. The Golgi tendon
organs (GTO) serves as a kind of proprioceptive sensory
receptor organs in our body. It can provide information about
changes in muscle tension. One end of GTO is connected to
the muscle ﬁbers and the other end merges into the tendon
bundles. When the central nervous system sends a message
to the agonist muscle to contract(here the agonist muscles
are gastrocnemius and soleus muscle),these target muscles
develop active force. Due to the applied force, GTO gets
compressed, and triggers Golgi tendon reﬂex (GT reﬂex),
which can relax and lengthen the target muscle. Therefore
the patient actively contracts his gastrocnemius and soleus
muscle, meanwhile makes these muscles get further relaxed.
The repetition of this process facilitates the patient to further
contract and relax his ankle joint. Since the target muscle is
also the agonist, this technique is usually called direct hold-
relax PNF (see Fig. 5(a)).
On the other hand, there is an indirect hold-relax PNF
technique (see Fig. 5(b)). In human body, there exists a
neural phenomenon called Reciprocal inhibition. When the
agonist muscle (muscle causing movement) starts to contract,
the tension in the antagonist muscle (muscle opposing move-
ment) is inhibited by impulses from motor neurons, and thus
must simultaneously relax. With reciprocal inhibition as one
muscle contracts, the opposing (antagonist) muscle will relax
and allow more movement around the joint. In this case the
target muscle is the opposing muscle (antagonist) and this
technique is called indirect hold-reﬂex PNF.
B. Subjects and Experiment Protocol
Five male chronic stroke patients with ankle contracture
and/or spasticity participated in the study. Detail information
is shown in Table I. Subjects’ age mean § std is 65.6 §
9.0 years, height is 170.4 § 11.0 cm and weight is 71.0
§ 12.6 kg. Two of them are left impaired side and others
are right. Their ﬁrst stroke occurred 42.8§ 13.3 years ago.
All the stroke patients are able to walk in an abnormal gait
without any mechanical aid, and able to generate plantar
ﬂexion using the calf muscles. They are totally from the
Rehabilitation Medicine Department, Peking University First
Hospital, and they gave written and informed consent before
the experiment.
The experiment protocol mainly involves three steps,
namely preparation, initialization and stretching.
1) Preparation: The length of the lower leg and height
of foot (distance from the bottom of foot to the lateral
malleous) are measured in order to properly adjust the
position of the device. It can ensure that the ankle joint is
able to aligned with the axis of the motor shaft. Subjects
are seated comfortably with knee ﬂexed at 30 degree which
was determined after multiple comparison. The lower leg
is strapped to the leg support and foot is attached to the
footplate. The skin is cleaned and conditioned with warm
water before attaching the electrode pads. Surface EMG
electrode is placed according to the recommendation of the
SENIAM project (Surface ElectroMyoGraphy for the Non-
Invasive Assessment of Muscles) to detect soleus muscle
EMG.
2) Initialization: At the beginning of each training, the
extreme position in ankle dorsiﬂexion was measured. Sub-
ject’s foot was moved passively to its dorsiﬂexion. when the
extreme position is reached, the motor is shut down. With
the ankle is set at the extreme dorsiﬂexion position, subject
is asked to perform maximum voluntary contraction(MVC)
of EMG in plantar ﬂexion direction by activating the soleus
muscle. MVC generally needs to be measured up to three
times. The peak value of MVC is used for normalization in
the PNF stretching.
3) Stretching: During the PNF stretching, ankle is rotated
from its neutral position to the extreme dorsiﬂexion position.
Then, the subject is asked to perform isometric contraction
with the soleus muscle activated and maintains the soleus
EMG in the range of 45% - 65% MVC for 20 seconds. Pro-
cessed EMG feedback and target range are provided through
a customized Labview program in the patient monitor. After
the 20 seconds muscle activation, ankle joint is moved back
to its neutral position to relax the muscle. The break between
each PNF stretching is about 10s. 30 trails are performed in
each training session. Before and after each training, ankle
joint is passively rotated between its neutral position and
extreme dorsiﬂexion position for about 1 min to warm-up or
relax the soleus and gastrocnemius muscle.
739
TABLE I
SUBJECT DATA
No. Age(yeah) Gender(M/F) Height(cm) Weight(kg) Impaired side(L/R) Injury duration(Month)
1 77 M 156 51 L 50
2 65 M 170 85 L 59
3 72 M 165 69 R 26
4 58 M 185 76 R 46
5 56 M 176 74 R 33
Mean§Std 65.6§9.0 / 170.4§11.0 71.0§12.6 / 42.8§13.3
60 70 80 90 100 110 120
0
10
20
30
40
50
Angle(degree)
Torque(Nm)
(a) Subject 1
60 70 80 90 100 110
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Angle(degree)
Torque(Nm)
(b) Subject 2
70 80 90 100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Angle(degree)
Torque(Nm)
(c) Subject 3
70 80 90 100
0
10
20
30
40
Angle(degree)
Torque(Nm)
(d) Subject 4
60 70 80 90 100 110
0
10
20
30
40
Angle(degree)
Torque(Nm)
(e) Subject 5
Fig. 6. Torque-angle relationship during passive movement before (red line) and after (blue line) about six weeks PNF training. The x-axis is the footplate
angle in degree. 0 degree refers that the footplate is parallel with ground while 90 degrees is when the footplate is vertical to the ground. The Y -axis is
the external dorsiﬂexion torque or plantar ﬂexor resistance torque in Nm. The torque caused by the weight of foot and footplate was subtracted.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The contracture and/or spasticity in calf muscle can causes
very large resistance torque during dorsiﬂexion. We have
checked the torque-angle relationship(hysteresis loop) during
one cycle of passive dorsiﬂexion and plantarﬂexion move-
ment before and after PNF training of about six weeks.
The results of ﬁve subjects are all shown in Fig. 6. Ankle
joint is moved passively from its neutral position to the
extreme dorsiﬂexion position with the subject seated in the
same position during each training. For each angle-torque
relation (hysteresis loop), the ascending curve represents the
passive dorsiﬂexion phase and the descend curve represents
the plantarfelxion phase. By comparison of before and after
PNF training, We can tell from hysteresis loop that resistance
torque in the extreme dorsiﬂexion position decreases or the
extreme dorsiﬂexion angle increases, or two of them changes
at the same time. For stroke survivors with ankle contracture
or spasticity, we pay close attention to dorsiﬂexion range
since their ankle is in plantarﬂexion position(drop foot)
all the time. For a representative case, such as subject
1, the extreme position in dorsiﬂexion has increased from
109.4 degrees to 116.9 degrees. At the extreme position in
dorsiﬂexion, the resistance torque decreased from 49.4 Nm to
38.1 Nm. We can also analyze data of other subjects like this.
These results indicate that PNF stretching can effectively
increase ankle joint range of motion and reduce joint stiffness
after continuous training. However, it is remarkable that
the effect in subject 4 after PNF training is very little.
Since he suffers from another cerebrovascular disease, it may
inﬂuence the effect of rehabilitation.
Passive stretching is characterized by rigidly moving the
foot through a prescribed pattern, so that the stroke patients
can hardly inﬂuence these motions. However, during the PNF
training, ankle is rotated from its neutral position to the
extreme dorsiﬂexion position and subject is asked to perform
isometric contraction with the muscle activated and maintain
the EMG in the range of percentage of MVC for a period
of time. Thus, PNF regarding as a active training method
can signiﬁcantly increase muscle strength and improve out
of control of the ﬂexor muscle which is inﬂuence by stroke,
but passive stretching can not. As shown in Fig. 7, we can
see that MVC of every subject is showing a rising trend as
740
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
0.25
0.3
Training number
Voltage(V)
Fig. 7. MVC of subjects in each training, subject 1 in red line, subject 2
in blue line, subject 3 in mauve line, subject 4 in green line and subject 5
in black line. The x-axis is the training number. The training frequency is
about three times each week and the total time is six weeks. The Y-axis is
MVC of soleus muscle EMG. It has subtracted baseline of EMG in slack
muscle.
time goes on. For a representative case, such as subject 1,
his MVC of soleus has increased from 0.11 V to 0.21 V .
Other subjects are similar. In addition, subject is becoming
faster to track the target line in the experiment project.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have developed a robot-assisted ankle re-
habilitation system and veriﬁed a new rehabilitation method
on it. In this pilot study, the subjects show increase of ROM
and decrease of resistant torque during dorsiﬂexion after 6
weeks PNF training. The muscle strength is also improved.
The preliminary experimental results indicate that PNF is an
effective method used in robotic system to treat ankle joint
with contracture and/or spasticity. Future work is to verify
more subjects to achieve more comprehensive and reliable
evaluation of both the system and the rehabilitation therapy
comparing with different training methods. In addition, we
will continue the long-term treatment for those patients and
further experiments on the effectiveness of their treatment.
REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Alexander and H. C. Bennet-Clark, “Storage of elastic strain
energy in muscle and other tissues,” Nature, vol. 265, pp. 114-117,
1977.
[2] N. Tejima, “Rehabilitation robotics: A review,” Adv. Robotics, vol. 14,
pp. 551-564, 2000.
[3] Q. Wang, Y . Huang, and L. Wang, “Passive dynamic walking with ﬂat
feet and ankle compliance,” Robotica, vol. 28, pp. 413-425, 2010.
[4] World Health Organization. (2008). The world health report. [Online].
Available: http://www.who.int/whr/2008/en
[5] T. Ingall, “Stroke-Incidence, mortality, morbidity and risk,” J. Insur.
Med, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 143-152, 2004.
[6] S. G. Chung, E. M. T. van Rey, Z. Bai, E. J. Roth, and L. Q. Zhang
, “Biomechanic chans in passive properties of hemiplegic ankles with
spastic hypertonia,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 85, pp. 1638-1646,
2004.
[7] J. Harlaar, J. G. Becher ,C. J. Snijders, and G. J. Lankhorst, “Pas-
sive stiffness characteristics of ankle plantar ﬂexors in hemiplegia,”
ClinBiomech., vol. 15, pp. 261-270, 2000.
[8] R. T. Katz and W. Z. Rymer, “Spastic hypertonia: mechanisms and
measurement,” Arch. Phys. Med. Rehabil., vol. 70, pp. 144-155, 1989.
[9] F. Gao and L. Q. Zhang, “In vivo biomechanical evaluations of
the medial gastrocnemius: changes in muscle properties in stroke
survivors,” Proc. of the 28th IEEE EMBS Annual Int. Conf., 2006.
[10] W. Vattanasilp, L. Ada, and J. Crosbie, “Contribution of thixotropy,
spasticity, and contracture to ankle stiffness after stroke,” J. Neurol.
Neurosur. Ps. vol. 69, pp. 34-39, 2000.
[11] M. M. Pfeffer and M. J. Reding, ”Stroke rehabilitation in: Principles
of neurologic rehabilitation, Edited by Lazar RB. New York: McGraw-
Hill,” pp. 105-119, 1998.
[12] M. J. Reding and F. McDowell, “Stroke rehabilitation,” NeurolClin.,
vol. 5, pp. 601-630, 1987.
[13] J. Dettori and C. Basmania, “Early ankle mobilization, part II: a one-
year followup of acute, lateral ankle sprains (a randomized clinical
trial),” Mil. Med., vol. 159, pp. 15-20, 1994.
[14] J. Carr and R. Shepherd, “Neurological rehabilitation: optimizing
motor performance,” Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann, 1998.
[15] M. L. Dombovy, B. A. Sandok, and J. R. Basford, “Rehabilitation for
stroke: A review,” Stroke, vol. 17, pp. 363-369, 1986.
[16] P.K. Jamwal, “Design analysis and control of wearable ankle rehabil-
itation robot”, 2011.
[17] S. Trevino, P. Davis, and P. Hecht, “Management of acute and chronic
lateral ligament injuries of the ankle,” Orthop. Clin. North Am., vol.
25, pp. 1-16, 1994.
[18] G. Kwakkel, R. C. Wagenaar, J. W. Twisk, G. J. Lankhorst, and J.
C. Koetsier, “Intensity of leg and arm training after primary middle-
cerebralartery stroke: A randomized trial,” Lancet, vol. 354, no. 9174,
pp. 191-196, 1999.
[19] H. I. Krebs, J. J. Palazzolo, L. Dipietro, M. Ferraro, J. Krol, K.
Rannekleiv, B. T. V olpe, and N. Hogan, “Rehabilitation robotics:
performance-based progressive robotassisted therapy,” Auton. Robot.,
vol. 15, pp. 7-20, 2003.
[20] H. I. Krebs, N. Hogan, M. L. Aisen, and B. T. V olpe, “Robot-aided
neurorehabilitation,” IEEE Trans. Rehabil. Eng, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 75-
87, 1998.
[21] M. M. Zhang, T. C. Davies, and S. Xie, “Effectiveness of robot-assisted
therapy on ankle rehabilitation - A systematic review,” J. Neuroeng.
Rehabil., vol. 10, no. 30, 2013.
[22] L. Q. Zhang, S. G. Chung, Z. Bai, D. Xu, E. M. van Rey, M. W.
Rogers, M. E. Johnson, and E. J. Roth, “Intelligent stretching of ankle
joints with contracture/spasticity,” IEEE Trans. Neur. Sys. Reh. Eng.,
vol. 10, no. 3, 2002.
[23] F. Gao, Y . P. Ren, E. J. Roth, R. Harvey, and L. Q. Zhang, “Effects
of repeated ankle stretching on calf muscle-tendon and ankle biome-
chanical properties in stroke survivors,” Clin. Biomech., vol. 26, pp.
516-522, 2011.
[24] K. Homma and M. Usuba, “Development of ankle dorsiﬂex-
ion/plantarﬂexion exercise device with passive mechanical joint,” Proc.
of the IEEE 10th Int. Conf. Rehabilitation Robotics, pp. 292-297, 2007.
[25] F. Gao and L. Q. Zhang, “Altered contractile properties of the
gastrocnemius muscle poststroke,” J. Appl. Physiol., vol. 105, pp.
1802-1808, 2008.
[26] H. Kabat and M. Knott, “Proprioceptive facilitation technics for
treatment of paralysis,” Phys. Ther. Rev., vol. 33, pp. 53-64, 1953.
[27] D. A. Klein, W. J. Stone, W. T. Phillips, J. Gangi, and S.Hartman,
“PNF training and physical function in assisted-living older adults,” J.
Aging Phys. Activ., vol. 10, pp. 476-488, 2002.
[28] N. Kofotolis, I. S. Vrabas, E. Vamvakoudis, A. Papanikolaou, and
K. Mandroukas, “Proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation training
induced alterations in muscle ﬁbre type and cross sectional area,” Brit.
J. Sport Med., vol. 39, pp. e11, 2005.
[29] D. C. Funk, A. M. Swank, B. M. Mikla, T. A. Fagan, and B. K.
Farr, “Impact of prior exercise on hamstring ﬂexibility: a comparison
of proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation and static stretching,” J.
Strength Cond. Res., vol. 17, pp. 489-492, 2003.
741
