  
? 
Abstract— Each year in the US, 628,000 people suffer an 
ankle sprain, and 795,000 suffer a new or recurrent stroke. Due 
to improved survival rates after stroke, significant increases in 
stroke population are projected by 2030. So far, there is no cost-
effective robotic ankle/balance trainer in the market. In this 
paper, we present the Virtually-Interfaced Robotic Ankle and 
Balance Trainer (vi-RABT), a low-cost robotic system that will 
improve overall ankle / balance strength, mobility and control. 
The system is equipped with 2 degrees of freedom (DOF) 
controlled actuation along with complete means of force and 
angular measurements. The preliminary results on a single 
robotic footplate confirm the system design. The system will be 
used for measurement of ankle kinematics, ankle kinetics and 
balance function, as well as for retraining motor control and 
strength of the ankle during plantarflexion / dorsiflexion 
(PF/DF), ankle inversion / eversion (IN/EV) and circumduction 
motions. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The ankle joint plays a vital role in our simplest everyday 
activities such as standing, walking, running, and 
maintaining stable posture. This joint is usually under the 
stress of the entire body weight, and accordingly is highly 
subject to physical trauma [1]. Neurological problems such 
as stroke, cerebral palsy and traumatic brain injury cause 
motor control impairments in the ankle joint. In contrast, 
orthopedic injuries such as ankle sprains damage the joint 
and ligaments, and produce secondary muscle weakness, but 
leave motor control mechanisms intact. Due to varied 
severities of patient injuries or impairments, a need exists for 
a rehabilitation device that offers assistive and resistive 
therapeutic mechanisms in different stages of rehabilitation.  
Conventional ankle and balance rehabilitation systems 
are built from a simple set of rigid and elastic mechanical 
elements. These systems are very cost-efficient and easy-to-
use for the physical therapist. The Complete Ankle 
Rehabilitation Device (CARD) was designed by practitioners 
to aid in faster rehabilitation at clinic or home [2]. Utilizing a 
combination of elastic bands the device can provide 
resistance to ankle motion in multiple degrees of freedom. 
The axes of motion are in line with those of the ankle joint 
 
A. B. Farjadian is with Bioengineering Department, Northeastern 
University, Boston, MA, USA (Phone: 617-373-7733; e-mail: 
farjadian.a@husky.neu.edu).  
A. Bugliari, P. Douçot, N. Lavins, A. Mazzotta, J. P. Valenzuela, S. 
Suri, P. Murphy and Q. Kong are with the department of Mechanical and 
Industrial Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.  
*M. K. Holden is with department of Physical Therapy, Northeastern 
University, Boston, MA, USA (e-mail: m.holden@neu.edu). 
*C. Mavroidis is with the department of Mechanical and Industrial 
Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA (e-mail: 
mavro@coe.neu.edu). 
* Author for correspondence. 
and the patient uses the system in the seated posture. Based 
on similar principles, other passive mechanical systems 
provide ankle training in the upright position for balance 
rehabilitation, e.g. the wobble board [3], Bosu ball [4], 
balance pads [5] and DynaDisc [6]. In spite of the lower cost 
and usability of these systems, they are not able to provide 
the motor control training, needed in neuro-rehabilitation, 
and active assistive / resistive options for orthopedic 
problems. Nor can they quantitatively monitor patients’ 
performance and progress to objectively assess rehabilitation 
procedures.  
Utilizing the recent advances in robotics and automation, 
a number of research prototypes and commercial products 
have targeted active ankle and balance rehabilitation. These 
systems can be categorized as wearable exoskeletons for 
over ground walking and stationary systems that can be used 
in hospital or home settings.  The AnkleBOT is a wearable 
2-DOF exoskeleton that provides assistive / resistive 
rehabilitation for plantarflexion / dorsiflexion (PF/DF) and 
inversion / eversion (IN/EV) of the ankle joint [7]. The 
AnkleBOT is sensorized with kinetic and kinematic 
measurments and utilizes an interactive video interface to 
instruct the specified training protocols. The system has a 
total weight of 3.6 Kg, which is potentially a barrier for 
patients with serious impairments. Further testing is needed 
to study the long-term effect of device on human subjects in 
more demanding applications such as over-ground walking. 
Furthermore there is no balance training mechanism 
implemented in this device.  
A 2 DOF orthosis, developed by the University of 
Delaware, is made of lightweight aluminum and telescopic 
plastic elements, and provides independent control of 
dorsiflexion / plantarflexion and supination / pronation axes 
during gait [8]. The Robotic Gait Trainer of the Arizona 
State University (RGTASU) is a 2-DOF exoskeleton that is 
developed using the new Spring Inside Muscle (SIM) 
actuator [9]. The SIM actuator is a bi-directional pneumatic 
actuator that combines an air muscle and a compression 
spring, to provide opposing flexion and extension movement 
across the ankle joint. The Powered Ankle-Foot Orthosis 
(PAFO) is a 2-DOF air muscle actuator that is controlled 
using the subjects muscle activation patterns [10]. The 
electromyography (EMG) reading from Soleus and Tibialis 
anterior muscles triggers the PF/DF actuation of the air 
muscle actuator. The system is made of lightweight carbon 
fibers and polypropylene, metal hinge joint, and two 
artificial pneumatic muscles.  
The Rutgers ankle rehabilitation system is a 6-DOF 
Stewart platform for clinical applications. The system is 
actuated by pneumatic cylinders and monitored by kinetic 
vi-RABT: Virtually Interfaced Robotic Ankle and Balance Trainer 
Amir B. Farjadian, Sean Suri, Ally Bugliari, Paul Douçot, Nate Lavins, Alex Mazzotta, Jan P. 
Valenzuela, Patrick Murphy, Qingchao Kong, Maureen K. Holden*, and Constantinos Mavroidis
*
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 228
  
and kinematic sensors. The system is equipped with virtual 
reality (VR) interface that renders therapeutic games, and has 
been shown to improve gait in patients with stroke [11].  
The Ankle Dorsiflexion Plantarflexion Exercise Device 
(ADPED) is another clinic-based rehabilitation system that 
specifically targets patients with complicated ankle problems 
such as joint contracture deformity [12]. The system design 
provides an adjustable footplate that rotates around the 
inversion / eversion axes to adapt to the patient’s foot angle 
to reduce the pain and increase the efficiency for variety of 
individuals. The system applies smooth continuous passive 
motion (CPM) exercise to the ankle joint in sitting position.  
The Lower Limb Exerciser with Intelligent Alloys 
(LEIA) was designed based on the novel shape memory alloy 
(SMA) actuators [13]. SMA actuators are lightweight, solid-
state alternative to conventional hydraulic, pneumatic, and 
electrical actuators. It provides a system with good 
repeatability and precision. This is a 1-DOF ankle 
rehabilitation system that can be controlled by EMG signal 
from the Tibialis anterior muscle. 
In 2008, our team developed the Northeastern University 
Virtual Ankle and Balance Trainer (NUVABAT) for ankle 
and balance rehabilitation [14]. This was a 2-DOF (PF/DF 
and IN/EV) movable footplate that was instrumented with 
force and angle sensors, and embedded within a standing 
platform. The system design allowed for use in stable 
(footplate locked) or dynamic (footplate movable) mode, in 
either sitting or standing position. Magneto-Rheological 
Fluid (MRF) brakes could provide variable resistance along 
both axes. Later, using center of pressure (COP) 
measurements augmented by game interface, a series of pre-
gait, weight shifting and balance control tests were 
conducted [15]. These games are unique as the COP is 
derived unilaterally (vs. bilaterally for other balance training 
systems), a feature particularly useful for patients with 
stroke. The absence of actuators in the design of NUVABAT 
was an inhibiting factor in exploring the dynamic exercise 
for active assistive and resistive therapy, and led to the 
design of our current device, the vi-RABT.  
Presently, no devices designed for ankle rehabilitation 
combine the ability to train balance function, ankle strength, 
mobility, and motor control into one system, nor do they 
typically allow for use of the device in multiple positions, 
such as sitting and standing.  This multi-position ability is an 
important system feature because in early rehabilitation and 
due to weaknesses patients may only be able to work on 
strength and mobility control of the ankle in a seated 
position. We have also tried to address this gap in ankle 
rehabilitation with our novel system, the vi-RABT. 
The vi-RABT is a 2-DOF rehabilitation system that 
provides actuated assistive and resistive therapy to patients 
with lower extremity disorders. The system is equipped with 
angle sensors in addition to the means for force and torque 
measurements. Using a simple control algorithm, preliminary 
testing was conducted on a human subject. The system has a 
promising potential to be effectively used in physical therapy 
of ankle deficits, balance disorders and variety of mobility 
impairments, such as stroke. 
II. DESIGN REQUIREMENTS 
A. Ankle Anatomy and Pathologies 
The ankle region is where the bones from the foot and leg 
meet. The tibia and fibula of the lower leg and the talus of 
the foot form the Talocrural joint, where plantarflexion / 
dorsiflexion (DF/PF) occur. The 5 tarsal bones, the 
calcaneous bone, and the 5 metatarsal bones interface with 
each other to form several other ankle joints, including the 
Subtalar, Transverse Tarsal and Tarsometatarsal joints.  The 
foot movement of Inversion / Eversion (IN/EV) is a complex 
combination of motion at several of these joints.  Inversion is 
a combination of supination, adduction and plantarflexion, 
while eversion combines pronation, abduction and 
dorsiflexion.  These multi-joint motions are a key to the 
ability of the foot to adapt to different support surface 
conditions and maintain upright balance. Ligaments, the 
strong elastic bands that connect the bones to one another, 
are also an important contributor to the flexible stability 
characteristic of ankle function. Finally, the muscles, 
connected to the bones via tendons, act as the actuators. The 
central nervous system (CNS) recruits the muscle fibers to 
do the desired work using a servo mechanism.  
Neurological injuries such as stroke affect primarily the 
control of the muscles via the CNS, but can secondarily 
produce changes such as joint / ligament stiffness or laxity. 
Conversely, orthopedic injuries such as sprains or fractures 
are primarily mechanical, but can produce secondarily motor 
control problems such as slowing of motor responses due to 
mechanical changes in injured soft tissues. There are 
immense variety of injuries and diseases that include ankle 
strengthening, motor control or balance training as part of 
the required rehabilitation plan.  
B. System Specifications 
There was a need for a system that can apply desired 
torque profiles and motion trajectories to the ankle joint in 
the standing and sitting positions. The system should be low-
cost, lightweight and easy-to-use both for patients and 
physical therapists. It should be able to compensate the 
human weight and provide the possibility of effective 
rehabilitation experience for the patients with variety of 
lower extremity and control disorders. Accordingly the 
system specifications are reported in Table I. 
TABLE I.  SYSTEM DESIGN REQUIREMENTS.  
Metric Design Specification 
Torque (N-m) 
PF/DF  200 
IN/EV  50 
Speed (RPM) 
PF/DF  20 
IN/EV 25 
Range of Motion (º) 
Dorsiflexion 25 
Plantarflexion 60 
Eversion  30 
Inversion 40 
Maximum user weight (Kg) 150  
Footplate size (shoe size) Women 6 - Men 14 
 
 
229
  
2
1
5
4
3
 
Figure 1.  vi-RABT schematic. Subjects feet will be strapped on the robotic force-plates (2); Patinets will be instructed to play the VR game as shown on 
the screen (5); The system can be used in stading or sitting posture using the adjustable chair (4); The surrounding rails (3) provides safety features to the 
patinets during practice. 
III. DESIGN & IMPLEMENTATION 
A. System Description 
The building components of vi-RABT are shown in Fig. 1. 
The system is composed of an electromechanical hardware in 
contact with the patient and a video screen to present the 
interactive games. The vi-RABT can be used for ankle and 
balance training of individuals. The system is equipped with 
force/angle sensors as well as actuators to apply 2-DOF 
rehabilitation exercises to each foot. Patients can use the 
system in a seated or standing posture. They face the large 
screen and are encouraged to engage in goal-oriented VR 
games, to improve their ankle function.  
As shown in Fig. 1, the final system will be composed of 
1) a stationary platform; 2) two robotic force-plates; 3) an 
adjustable seat; 4) the wide 3D projection screen and safety 
features as elaborated below. At this stage of our research, 
we are focused on a single robotic platform.  
B. Stationary Platform 
This subsystem serves as the housing for the robotic 
force-plates and the safety rails. The stationary platform 
provides additional space around the robotic force-plates for 
the patients to step on. This might be needed based on the 
specific training protocol. The overall area of the platform is 
110 (L) x 100 (W) cm?cm and the surface is at the same 
height as the robotic force-plates. 
Human subjects have different stance widths. This 
component is subject to change due to variability in humans’ 
anatomy and comfort. Accordingly, the stationary platform 
has been designed so that it can accommodate variable 
stance widths in between two robotic force-plates, or 
subject’s feet. The current design allows for the stance width 
of 15-35 cm. 
1
3
4
5
2
6
7
 
Figure 2.  The robotic force-plate with 2-DOF actuation (TOP: CAD 
drawing; BOTTOM: Experimental Prototype). The cubic support frame (1); 
internal and external layers of the footplate (2); the PF/DF motor and 
transmission system (3); the IN/EV motor and transmission system (4); the 
encoders (5); the foot strap (6); and mechanical stop (7). 
C. Robotic Force-plates 
The essential contribution of this system is to provide 2-
DOF controlled actuation that will deliver assistive / resistive 
rehabilitation to the lower extremities. The vi-RABT is 
230
  
composed of two robotic footplates (currently only one is 
implemented with actuators) to provide objective 
manipulation to the human legs bilaterally. In the static mode 
(the motors off), the system can be used as a force-plate for 
monitoring COP, either unilaterally (presently implemented) 
or bilaterally. The unilateral COP monitoring is a unique 
feature useful for pre-gait, weight shifting and balance 
activity training in patients with stroke.  These features were 
tested in our previous system, the NUVABAT [14-15].  
The 2-DOF actuation was provided by a two layer design 
(horizontally) for the footplate. As shown in Fig. 2, the 
robotic footplate is composed of an internal force-plate 
surrounded by an external housing. The internal layer (i.e. 
the force-plate) was considered for the IN/EV movement and 
the external layer for PF/DF, hence the robotic force-plate. 
As shown in Fig. 2, the patients’ feet will be strapped onto 
the acrylic footplate and subjects can interact with the system 
in standing or seated posture.  
The force-plate is supported on the cubic support frame 
via plates, load cells, bars and ball bearings. The support 
frame is 73 (L) ? 33 (W) ? 33 (H) cm?cm?cm with a 36.5 ? 
(L) ? 16.5 (W) cm?cm footplate. It is made of 3.8 cm (1.5 
inch) aluminum bars, which was shown to have minimal 
deflection and stress under our maximum weight application 
(150 Kg).  
C.1 Actuation and Transmission Mechanism 
The robotic force-plate is actuated by electrical motors 
along 2-DOF. The primary design criterion of the robotic 
platform was the ability to provide enough counteracting 
torque to the patient’s weight (in standing posture) while still 
affording the desired range of motion. Other crucial criteria 
were portability, low size, lightweight and ease-of-use.  
Two motors were selected based on the required torque / 
speed, as specified in Table I, and response time in this 
application. Accordingly the 660 W brushless DC motor 
(BLY-344S-48V-3200 from Anaheim Automation, 
Anaheim, CA) was connected to the gearbox (GBPH-0902-
NP-100) with a 100:1 ratio to gain the mechanical advantage 
and provide the required characteristics along the PF/DF 
axis. Similarly the 220 W brushless DC motor (BLY-342S-
160V-3000) was connected to the gearbox (GBPH-0902-NP-
100) to actuate the IN/EV axis. The motors have 300% 
maximum producible torque (rated torque) which is a secure 
enough margin for this application. Both motors were 
electrically driven by power controllers (PF/DF: XSL-230-
40, IN/EV: XSJ-230-10 from Copley Controls, Canton, 
MA). In order to control the motors, a custom-made 
computer software was developed in LabVIEW (National 
Instrument Corp., Austin, TX). The software was developed 
on a desktop computer and connected to the power 
controllers via a portable USB data acquisition board (NI-
USB 6216, National Instrument Corp.). 
The power from both motors was transmitted by a pulley 
(with 1:1 ratio in both axes) and timing belt. The belt and 
pulley were selected to match the required torque and RPM. 
The IN/EV motor is connected to the bottom of the external 
layer via an aluminum plate (Fig. 2). The power from this 
motor is transmitted through a pulley (8MX-45S-36) and 
poly chain timing belt (8MGT-1120-36, from Gates, Denver, 
CO) to the internal acrylic plate. As shown in Fig. 2, the 
PF/DF motor is located in the bottom corner of the support 
frame. Similarly the power from PF/DF motor is transmitted 
through a pulley (8MX-45S-36) and poly chain timing belt 
(8MGT-1120-36, from Gates, Denver, CO) to the robotic 
footplate. This setup allows for maximum efficiency and 
minimal backlash as well as enough flexibility to deal with 
misalignment issues.  
C.2   Sensing Mechanisms 
The robotic footplate is instrumented with angle and 
force measurement sensing units. In order to measure the 
force, the internal layer is built of five different components: 
an acrylic plate, an aluminum plate, load cells, metal 
crossbars and aluminum beams as shown in Fig. 3. The 
patient’s foot is strapped on the acrylic plate. Acrylic was 
chosen because it is significantly lighter than aluminum and 
provides a relatively high rigidity. The aluminum plate was 
attached to the acrylic plate to support and strengthen the 
footplate and ensure minimal deflection. Four load cells 
(53CR from Honeywell Inc., Morristown, NJ) were inserted 
symmetrically in the four corners of the footplate, in between 
the aluminum plate and the two metal crossbars. The metal 
crossbars are connected to the surrounding aluminum beams.  
2
3
4
5
1
6
 
Figure 3.  The robotic force-plate, load cells and sensing mechanism (TOP: 
experimental prototype; BOTTOM: CAD drawing). The load cells (1); 
acrylic plate (2); aluminum plate (3); metal crossbar (4); aluminum beams 
(5); the linear spring to create a preload (6). 
One of the design needs was the possibility to measure 
tensile force as well as compressive force. This was achieved 
by utilizing a preload structure in the force-plate. 
Accordingly, a bolt was passed through the aluminum 
crossbars to the acrylic and metal footplate and was secured 
by a nut on top of the footplate. A compression spring (k = 
10,000 N/m) was inserted in between the bolt head/washer 
and the crossbar. The same structure was applied to the 
second crossbar. The preload on each pair of load cells (back 
and front) can be adjusted by tightening the bolts. The 
subject’s foot will be strapped to the footplate and by 
231
  
applying the voluntary force along dorsiflexion will relax the 
load cells and lead to tensile force measurement.  
Another important variable for control is the position or 
angular displacement. Two optical encoders (ENC-A5DI-
1250-394-H-G, from Anaheim Automation, Anaheim, CA) 
were used to measure the instantaneous angle of rotation 
along each axis. The encoders were placed in the closest 
proximity to the footplate, i.e. the robot’s end effector, for 
accurate measurement (see Fig. 2). For that purpose an 
appropriate housing was designed and 3D-printed for the 
pulleys so that the encoders can be connected to the pulleys 
on the footplate. 
C.3      Foot Straps 
In order to transfer the exerted force or motion trajectory 
to the patient’s foot, a foot binding mechanism was used. 
Accordingly a foot strap (Flow Flite, from CA, USA) was 
attached to the acrylic footplate to embrace and secure the 
patient’s foot on the robotic footplate during a variety of 
demanding training protocols. This is an adjustable foot 
binding that can be fitted to a variety of patients with 
different shoe sizes. The binding also has a release 
mechanism that will be activated in rare situations of high 
pressure on the locks.  
D.   Chair 
Due to the severity and complexity of injuries, many 
patients (e.g., patients with stroke) may need to begin 
training in the seated posture. For those patients, an 
adjustable seat that allows training in incremental positions 
between sitting and standing is ideal. Accordingly we 
utilized a chair system with adjustable height. The chair 
allows training of the ankle while positioned in a range of 
angular seated positions thus allowing hip and knee to move 
from flexion (seated) to extension (standing). Our current 
prototype allows only regular seated posture.  
E. Virtual Reality Interface 
Another unique feature of the vi-RABT is the interactive 
gaming interface, which allows augmented feedback based 
on both kinematic and haptic features of the subject 
performance, and thus facilitation of the motor learning 
through a wide variety of mechanisms. Two projectors 
(Hitachi's CP-SX1350) were used to create a 3D interface. 
The wide projection screen (3?2 m) was used to increase the 
patient engagement in the rehabilitation procedure. Speakers 
will be utilized to augment the experience. A large screen 
display will be a compelling and motivating input for 
subjects who may have difficulty feeling or seeing small 
movements in their ankle while practicing their exercises, 
especially in the presence of sensory impairments.  So far we 
have implemented different weight shifting, range of motion 
and stepping games similar to the NUVABAT [15].  
F.   Safety Features 
We anticipate that the majority of the patients who use 
this device will have impaired ankle strength and/or balance 
control. Therefore, rigorous hardware and software safety 
features were considered in the design phase. These features 
prevent excessive footplate rotation and extreme torque 
values. The hardware features include the foot straps; safety 
handlebars, a harness (when standing), and mechanical stops.  
Algorithms targeting safety were implemented in the 
system control software. These features specifically provide 
limit thresholds for both angular displacement and maximum 
applied torque. For example in the reported experiment (see 
next section), the maximum threshold was set to 25° for DF 
and -60° for PF. So when the footplate reached the threshold, 
it automatically stopped the rotation. This value can be 
adjusted according to severity of patients’ deficits.  
In order to further assure patient’s safety in the system, 
hardware mechanical safety features were considered 
separately. So in order to avoid excessive rotation, a 
mechanical stop was considered for the IN/EV axis. As 
shown in Fig. 2, this is implemented underneath the footplate 
and acts as a limiter to mechanically prevent excessive 
rotation (> 45°) of the footplate along the IN/EV axis. 
As explained in the previous section, the patient’s foot 
will be strapped into the bindings on the footplate. This is to 
provide the maximum control over the ankle joint. However 
having the patient’s foot tight on the footplate will raise the 
risk of damage to the tissue in uncontrolled situations, such 
as falls or excessive power. This problem will become more 
serious by considering the maximum producible torque 
(300% of the rated toque) of the motors. We are visioning to 
utilize the inherent quick release mechanism in the ski-board 
bindings. Using this feature the person can be quickly 
separated from the robotic footplate in many undesired 
situations.  
In the future balance tests, in order to increase the 
patient’s security and also counteract part of his weight, a 
safety harness will be added to this system. The harness 
serves to protect the patient if they were to lose their balance. 
It can also be used to bear some of the patient’s weight 
depending on the ongoing rehabilitation paradigm. The 
harness will be mounted directly onto the system and should 
be easily attached or removed. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
At this stage of our research, only one robotic footplate is 
fully instrumented. In order to investigate the integrity and 
feasibility of the completed robotic force-plate, a preliminary 
control software was developed (LabVIEW, National 
Instrument Corp., Austin, TX). The software was used to 
read the angular displacements from the encoders, along 2-
DOF, and control the motors. A joystick pad was considered 
as a user interface. By pressing the four directional arrows on 
the joystick, the user could move the robotic footplate in four 
different directions. The range of motion was limited by the 
software. The video demonstration of this experiment is 
submitted for more tangible visualization.  
A healthy male subject (one of the experimenters) was 
recruited to stand on robotic footplates, having his right foot 
on the single motorized footplate. His left leg was free on the 
left static footplate. He was instructed to follow the motions 
232
  
applied by the robotic footplate, and to distribute his weight 
between the two plates at his comfort and confidence. 
10 15 20 25
-60
-40
-20
0
20
40
60
Time (s)
Angle (degree)
EV/IV Angle EV/IV Motor
PF/DF Motor PF/DF Angle
Motors (CW/CCW)
CW
CCW
CW
CCW
 
Figure 4.  Preliminary results: Subject standing on the robotic force-plate 
and controlling the footplate via joystick. Plate angles (triangular shape): 
IN/EV (dots), PF/DF (dashed); and the alternating commands to the motors 
(pulse signals): IN/EV motor (dot-dash), PF/DF motor (solid). The DF and 
IN angles are toward positive direction. Motors turned clock-wise (CW) / 
counter-clock-wise (CCW) with a pulse voltage on the rising / falling edge.  
As shown in Fig. 4, the experimenter was pressing the 
arrow keys on the joystick to control the force-plate along 
four directions. The presented curvature (closer to the peaks) 
on the triangular shape PF/DF plot is due to the subject’s 
resisting weight on the footplate.  
V.    CONCLUSIONS 
This paper described a novel 2-DOF robotic ankle and 
balance trainer called the virtually-interfaced robotic ankle 
and balance trainer (vi-RABT). Vi-RABT can be used for 
measurement of ankle kinematics, kinetics and balance 
function, as well as for retraining standing balance, motor 
control and strength of the ankle during plantarflexion / 
dorsiflexion (PF/DF), ankle inversion / eversion (IN/EV) and 
circumduction motions. Furthermore, the vi-RABT was 
designed for use in either a sitting or standing position to 
accommodate early and late phases of rehabilitation training. 
The system is composed of A) a robotic force-plate to apply 
desired force profiles and motion trajectories to the human 
lower extremities; B) the surrounding platform to host the 
robotic force-plates and supply safety hand grips for the 
patients; C) the harness to increase the safety and selectively 
compensate the patient’s weight as needed by the therapeutic 
regimen; D) the chair to provide the possibility of following 
the exercise regimen in the seated posture; and E) a 3-D wide 
screen to project virtual reality games and create an 
entertaining, immersive therapy experience for the patient.  
Single robotic footplate was recruited. The robotic force-
plate is instrumented with force and angular displacement 
sensors to provide full control, monitoring and diagnostic 
capabilities. Beyond effectiveness, other major specifications 
for the final product were the ease-of-use, portability, small 
size and lightweight. Considering the amount of delivered 
power, these specifications were fairly achieved by the 
presented mechanical design, gear-motors and power 
transmission mechanism. The strong electrical motors are 
able to counteract the patient’s weight and provide the 
desired assistive/resistive therapy. The vi-RABT is equipped 
with software and hardware safety features to assure 
effective human-machine interaction.  
Preliminary results, using one robotic footplate, confirm 
the system design and promising potentials. More objective 
rehabilitation exercises with more human subjects will be 
performed in the near future. Accordingly the desired 
therapeutic protocol will be implemented using a more 
advanced control method. We will test the system on healthy 
subjects and extend the paradigm to patients. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. H. Soboroff, E. M. Pappius, A. L. Komaroff, “Benefits, risks, and 
costs of alternative approaches to the evaluation and treatment of 
severe ankle sprain”. Clin Orthop Relat Res, vol. 8 pp. 183-160.  
[2] "Complete Ankle Rehabilitation Device," Complete Rehab Devices, 
LLC, http://www.completerehabdevices.com/ [Accessed 15 Sept. 
2013]. 
[3] J. U. Wester, S. M. Jespersen, K. D. Nielsen, and L. Neumann, 
“Wobble board training after partial sprains of the lateral ligaments of 
the ankle: a prospective randomized study,” J Orthop Sports Phys 
Ther, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 332–336, May 1996.  
[4] D. Weck and J. E. E. Cotter, “Balancing device,” US Patent No 
7,494,446, Issued Feb 24, 2009.  
[5] Y.-S. Lee, “Rehabilitation Apparatus Using Game Device,” US Patent 
application, US20120116258 A1, Published May 10, 2012.  
[6] M. Kemery, T. N. Guild, and Z. Rapaport, “Inflatable structure and 
method of manufacture,” US Patent No. 7,156,787, issued on Jan. 2 
2007. 
[7] A. Roy, H. I. Krebs, S. L. Patterson, T. N. Judkins, I. Khanna, L. W. 
Forrester, R. M. Macko, and N. Hogan, “Measurement of Human 
Ankle Stiffness Using the Anklebot,” in Proc. Of the IEEE 10th 
International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, ICORR 2007, 
pp. 356–363, 2007.  
[8] A. Agrawal, V. Sangwan, S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal and S. A. 
Binder-Macleod, "Design of a Novel Two Degree-of-Freedom Ankle-
Foot Orthosis," J. of Mechanical Design, vol. 129, pp. 1137-1143, 
2007. 
[9] J. A. Ward, S. Balasubramanian, T. Sugar, and J. He, “Robotic Gait 
Trainer Reliability and Stroke Patient Case Study,” in Proc. of the 
IEEE 10th International Conference on Rehabilitation Robotics, 
ICORR 2007, pp. 554–561, 2007. 
[10] D. P. Ferris, K. E. Gordon, G. S. Sawicki, and A. Peethambaran, “An 
improved powered ankle–foot orthosis using proportional myoelectric 
control,” Gait & Posture, vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 425–428, Jun. 2006. 
[11] A. Mirelman, B. L. Patritti, P. Bonato, J. E. Deutsch, "Effects of 
virtual reality training on gait biomechanics of individuals post-
stroke," Journal of Gait & Posture, vol. 31, pp. 433-7, 2010. 
[12] K. Homma and M. Usuba, “Development of Ankle 
Dorsiflexion/Plantarflexion Exercise Device with Passive Mechanical 
Joint,” in Proc. of the IEEE 10th International Conference on 
Rehabilitation Robotics, ICORR 2007, pp. 292–297, 2007. 
[13] S. Pittaccio and S. Viscuso, “An EMG-Controlled SMA Device for 
the Rehabilitation of the Ankle Joint in Post-Acute Stroke,” J. of 
Materi Eng and Perform, vol. 20, no. 4–5, pp. 666–670, Jul. 2011. 
[14] Y. Ding, M. Sivak, B. Weinberg, C. Mavroidis, and M. K. Holden, 
“NUVABAT: Northeastern university virtual ankle and balance 
trainer,” in Proc. of the 2010 IEEE Haptics Symposium, pp. 509–514, 
2010. 
[15] M. K. Holden, J. Corsino, B. Miller, M. Delfanti, C. Mavroidis, 
"Development and testing of 8 balance and pre-gait activity games for 
the Northeastern University Virtual Ankle and Balance Trainer 
(NUVABAT),"  Physical Therapy. vol. 92, pp. 2293, 2012. 
233
