 
 ? 
Abstract – A method to autonomously control multiple envi-
ronmental cameras, which are currently fixed, for providing 
more adaptive visual information suited to the work situation 
for advanced unmanned construction is proposed. Situations in 
which the yaw, pitch, and zoom of cameras should be controlled 
were analyzed and imaging objects including the machine, ma-
nipulator, and end-point and imaging modes including tracking, 
zoom, posture, and trajectory modes were defined. To control 
each camera simply and effectively, four practical camera roles 
combined with the imaging objects and modes were defined as 
the overview-machine, enlarge-end-point, posture-manipulator, 
and trajectory-manipulator. A role assignment system was then 
developed to assign the four camera roles to four out of six 
cameras suitable for the work situation, e.g., reaching, grasping, 
transport, and releasing, on the basis of the assignment priority 
rules, in the real time. Debris removal tasks were performed by 
using a VR simulator to compare fixed camera, manual control, 
and autonomous systems. Results showed that the autonomous 
system was the best of the three at decreasing the number of 
grasping misses and error contacts and increasing the subjective 
usability while improving the time efficiency. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
ISASTER rescue and recovery operations are expected 
by the public to be performed safely and effectively in an 
expeditious way. Such operations are generally conducted 
using construction machinery, which has the advantage of 
being able to produce massive force. Construction machinery 
is maneuvered by an operator who is in a cockpit installed 
inside the machine (hereinafter called in-vehicle operation), 
as shown in the upper part of Fig. 1. However, in disaster 
response work, in-vehicle operation is often subjected to two 
serious problems: one, the endangerment of the lives of the 
operators, owing to secondary disasters such as collapsing 
debris, machines toppling over, and the falling and breakage 
of transported objects, and two, the limitations of the envi-
ronment, owing to unusual or dangerous circumstances such 
 
 M. Kamezaki is with the Research Institute for Science and Engineering 
(RISE), Waseda University, 17 Kikui-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0044, 
Japan (corresponding author to provide phone and fax: +81-3-3203-4457; 
e-mail: kamezaki@ieee.org).  
 J. Yang is the Major in Modern Mechanical Engineering, Graduate School 
of Creative Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 17 Kikui-cho, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0044, Japan. 
 H. Iwata is with the Department of Modern Mechanical Engineering, 
School of Creative Science and Engineering, Waseda University, Green 
Computing System Research and Development Center, 27 Waseda-machi, 
Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0042, Japan (e-mail: jubi@waseda.jp). 
 S. Sugano is with the Department of Modern Mechanical Engineering, 
School of Creative Science and Engineering, Waseda University, 3-4-1 
Okubo, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169-8555, Japan (e-mail: sugano@waseda.jp). 
 URL: http://www.sugano.mech.waseda.ac.jp/ 
as underwater condition or the presence of carbon monoxide 
or radiation, where human cannot live biologically.  
 Tele-operation technologies have been introduced into 
such works for addressing the above problems [1]–[3]. Note 
that they are called unmanned construction but do not mean 
autonomous control. In unmanned construction, an operator 
is in a safe operation room located at a remote place from the 
disaster site, as shown in the lower part of Fig. 1. Various data 
is exchanged between the work and remote sites by using 
radio communication techniques. Operational signals from 
the control levers are transmitted to tele-operated machines 
on the work site, such as hydraulic shovels, bull-dozers, and 
dump trucks. Sensor signals such as positional data from 
satellite positioning systems and images from in-vehicle and 
environmental cameras are transmitted to the operation room 
and they are projected onto multiple two-dimensional (2-D) 
monitors, as shown in the lower right of Fig. 1.  
 The safety of operators is physically ensured and the en-
vironmental limitations are partially resolved by using un-
manned construction systems. However, these systems are 
simply an integration of existing tele-operation, monitoring, 
and communication technologies, and so they face various 
problems. The most critical problem is the decrease of time 
efficiency. In excavation work using a tele-operation system, 
the time efficiency is lowered by about 40% compared to 
in-vehicle operation [4]. The improvement of the time effi-
ciency is a high-priority task because disaster response work 
should be performed as quickly as possible. Another problem 
An Autonomous Multi-Camera Control System Using  
Situation-Based Role Assignment for Tele-Operated Work Machines 
Mitsuhiro Kamezaki, Member, IEEE, Junjie Yang,  
Hiroyasu Iwata, Member, IEEE, and Shigeki Sugano, Fellow, IEEE 
D
Fig. 1 Unmanned construction using tele-operation technologies
Remote site
Work site 
Work site 
Machine 
(Operator) 
Operation room
(Operator) 
Tele?operated machine
(Unmanned)
Environmental camera
Radio communication
Debris
Debris
Control lever
Multiple
monitors
In?vehicle camera
Camera image
Operationalsignal
Tele?operation(unmanned construction) 
In?vehicle operation
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5971
