 
measurements in such environments. Each Moball is 
equipped with an array of low-power and low-mass sensors 
and electronics. Moballs can communicate peer-to-peer with 
other Moballs, as well as with orbiters and other in-situ assets 
when in view. This creates a wireless mesh network and 
provides an interface for a global control system that will 
ensure desired area coverage, hazard avoidance, while
optimizing Moball’s exploring efforts according to available 
resources (power, memory, and bandwidth). Unlike previous 
wind-driven designs, Moball incorporates a novel combined 
mechanical control and energy scavenging system—
essentially regenerative actuators.  This system can steer the 
wind-driven vehicle to maintain coverage over a geographic 
area, or to precisely position a sensor for scientific 
measurements. Because the same mechanism can scavenge 
wind energy, Moball is capable of long-duration operation in 
the harsh polar climate. This paper considers and optimizes 
the design of the energy scavenging mechanical system, 
showing that in its’ intended environments, enough energy 
can be extracted to support prolonged system operation. 
Structure of the Paper. After reviewing prior work in 
the rest of this section, Section II introduces Moball's design, 
focusing on the energy harvesting system while Section III 
presents Moball’s governing equations. Section IV describes 
simplified energy-harvesting simulations, and Section V 
presents a motion-generating controller and simulations of 
self-generated motion. Section VI provides a detailed 
discussion of the results to draw general conclusions about 
energy harvesting design principles for Moball. 
Relation to Previous Work. Several previous works 
have considered mobile sensor platforms that can harvest
energy, generate motion, and gather and transmit data.  
Liquid Robotics' Wave-Glider [8] is a submerged glider 
tethered to a floating buoy, which harnesses wave-energy to 
produce forward motion while using solar arrays to power 
on-board electronics. This configuration autonomously 
circumnavigated the Island of Hawaii in 2009. Webb et al. 
conceptualized and tested an underwater vehicle that propels 
itself by converting thermal gradients into buoyancy changes 
[9]. Buckle et al. demonstrated that thermal gradients along 
the ocean's depth could partially replenish the energy load 
imposed by sensors and actuation of an autonomous 
underwater vehicle [10]. Erturk et al. and Secord et al.
utilized the forward and reverse-piezoelectric effect to 
generate thrust and harvest energy from hydrodynamic drag, 
although sensors were not employed in these designs [11, 
12]. Yu et al. determined that endowing sensor nodes with 
mobility increased network lifetime when each of the nodes 
harvest energy and transmit data with finite on-board energy 
constraints [13]. To our knowledge, the wind-driven energy 
harvesting approach presented in this paper is new to the field 
of robotics.  
Moball is not the first wind-driven mobile sensor module. 
The Jet Propulsion Laboratory's (JPL) Tumbleweed is a 
superficially similar concept, and has been proposed for use 
on Earth, Mars, Saturn's moon Titan, and Neptune's moon 
Triton [14-16]. Tumbleweed is “assumed to be a perfect, 
inelastic, homogeneous sphere that rolls without slip” and its’ 
motion is passive and dictated by the wind, although there 
have been suggestions to implement control [17]. Moball
augments these abilities with active trajectory control and 
energy harvesting, which increases network flexibility, 
productivity, and lifespan.  
II. BACKGROUND: MOBALL’S DESIGN 
Moball is a spherical mobile sensor platform that 
combines mobility and energy harvesting to allow for 
autonomous data gathering and transmission over large 
terrains and time-spans. It can move via rolling, bouncing, 
saltation through the air, and skidding on ice.  
Fig. 1 illustrates Moball’s basic design. Moball is an 
inflatable sphere whose optimal diameter depends on the 
wind distribution of the intended environment (see Section 
V). Moball’s inflate-upon-arrival capability facilitates ease of 
transportation to the region of interest. Moball’s exterior is 
composed of abrasion-resistant fiber cladding and rugged 
polymer. For additional details regarding proposed Moball
mission and communication systems architecture, sensing, 
deployment, and task planning, see [2, 7]  This paper focuses 
solely on the potential for wind-driven energy harvesting 
with this design. 
Moball’s energy harvesting and self-propelled motion are 
intended to come from an electromechanical apparatus,
depicted in Fig. 1. The mechanism consists of three 
orthogonal tubes that are rigidly fixed inside Moball. 
Concentric and cylindrical magnets lie inside each tube, and 
can slide freely as the ball moves under a wind force. 
Concentric and exterior to each tube are several solenoids. As 
the wind rotates Moball, the magnets pass through the
solenoids and the resulting change in magnetic flux through 
the solenoid generates energy due to Faraday’s Law of 
Induction. Harvested energy is stored in an on-board battery. 
The apparatus can also be operated in reverse. When current 
is passed through a solenoid, a nearby magnet experiences a 
force proportional to the applied current and the amount of 
magnetic coupling. By coordinating the solenoid currents, it 
is possible to move each of the magnets such that Moball’s 
center of mass (COM) is shifted away from the center of 
rotation (COR). A non-collocated COM and COR will bias 
rolling, or generate rolling from standstill, and this is the 
basis for Moball’s steering and self-propulsion. 
 
Figure 1:  Simplified cutaway view of Moball. Sensory systems, 
battery, computation, and communication are not shown for clarity. 
2666
