  
? 
Abstract— In this paper, we propose an electric power 
management system for delivering power to home appliances 
with mobile robots. With our system, the user places an 
appliance without power cables freely within the home, and a 
robot provides the appliance with the electric power required for 
its operation. In addition to providing explanations of a usage 
scenario and a theoretical analysis, we demonstrate a prototype 
implementation. The robot of the prototype autonomously 
locates the target appliance, transfers its battery power to the 
appliance, and returns to the home position to recharge its 
battery. The validation study showed our proof-of-concept 
prototype worked as expected by the theory. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Our living and working environments are full of electronic 
appliances such as lamps, fans, and TVs. Most of these 
appliances run with power from outlets, and thus appliances 
are often deployed near outlets. If the user wishes to deploy an 
appliance in the middle of a room, a power cable must be 
extended across the room. However, such cables can interfere 
with our activities. We may get caught in a cable while 
walking, and home robots may be unable to cross cables. 
Consequently, deploying appliances near outlets is the first 
choice in current home environments. 
In this paper, we reconsider the issue of appliance 
deployment. Some appliances work more efficiently or 
conveniently if they are operated at arbitrary locations in a 
room. For example, an electric fan deployed near a person can 
work in an energy–efficient manner. As another example, the 
ability to freely use battery-charging equipment for mobile 
devices such as computers, phones, and cameras at many 
locations (e.g., sofa, table, kitchen) would be highly 
convenient. Recently, mobile work practice as known as 
flexiwork [1] or nomadic work [2] is attracting attention and 
also becoming popular within the office and living 
environment. Therefore, the ability to use appliances in places 
is worth realizing because it supports this new style of living 
and working. 
 
All authors are with Japan Science and Technology Agency, ERATO, 
IGARASHI Design Interface Project, Tokyo, Japan. 
Kentaro Ishii, Wirawit Chaochaisit, and Takeo Igarashi are also with The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan (e-mail: kenta@ardbeg.c.u-tokyo.ac.jp). 
Youichi Kamiyama and Masahiko Inami are also with Keio University, 
Yokohama, Japan. 
One solution to the cabling problem above is to use 
batteries. Some of the aforementioned commercial home 
appliances (e.g., TVs, fans, electric lamps) can be used for a 
while without connecting cables because they already have 
batteries. This inspired us to conceive of robots that 
autonomously charge the batteries of appliances to free them 
of cables. Building on this idea, we propose a cable-less 
power management system consisting of power-delivering 
mobile robots and batteries. A key component of our system is 
the “remote dock,” which is an appliance-side robot dock that 
contains a battery and a power inverter to provide AC output. 
Hence, each appliance operates on battery power from a 
remote dock, the battery of which in turn is charged by a 
mobile robot. 
Fig. 1 illustrates a usage example. A fan is connected to a 
remote dock. The robot searches for the to-be-charged remote 
dock. After docking, it transfers its battery power to the 
battery in the remote dock, thereby allowing the fan to operate 
subsequently using the battery power. Thus, freed of cables, 
appliances can be used anywhere in the home. If the power 
consumption of an appliance is below a certain value as 
described later, it can be continuously operated as if it were 
connected to an outlet. 
In this paper, we first describe a usage scenario of our 
system and provide a theoretical analysis of the system 
performance. The equations derived from the theoretical 
analysis are useful for selecting appropriate components to 
replicate similar systems. We then describe the 
implementation of our prototype and a validation study. Our 
main focus is not on any specific algorithm or mechanism of 
robot navigation or scouting, but on the application of a home 
mobile robot. Our contribution includes the idea of using 
mobile home robots as cable-less electric-power suppliers, a 
theoretical analysis of the proposed system and a 
proof-of-concept demonstration. 
II. RELATED WORK 
The battery issue is a crucial topic in the field of robotics. 
The idea of autonomous robot recharging has been explored 
[3]. A robot can autonomously recharge its battery for 
permanent robot activities. Current commercial domestic 
robots basically have this feature to achieve sufficient 
Delivering Electricity to Home Appliances by Mobile Robots 
Kentaro Ishii, Youichi Kamiyama, Wirawit Chaochaisit, Masahiko Inami, and Takeo Igarashi 
Figure 1.  Cable-Free Operation with a Battery Charging Mobile Robot. (a) The robot autonomously finds an appliance dock connected with a fan. 
(b) The robot transfers its battery power to the appliance dock. (c) The fan operates using the received battery power. 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6375
  
autonomy in the home. In addition to the use of special 
docking stations, recent studies have addressed the 
self-feeding problem with common outlets [4-6]. The robots 
in these studies autonomously detect outlets on walls and 
recharge their batteries by plugging in their own power cables. 
In other studies related to swarm robotics, the idea of 
robots delivering electric power to other robots for continuous 
operation of the robot team has been proposed [7-9]. In these 
studies, simulation results showed that energy-transporting 
robots successfully transferred battery power to other robots. 
With the technique presented in [10], the robots in [9] are 
expected to be physically implemented. Our approach is 
similar in that a robot is used to transfer battery power. 
However, our concept is unique in targeting regular home 
appliances in our living environment. Unlike in [9], we 
employ a domestic robot that can move in a home 
environment. We also model the use of home appliances and 
demonstrate a reproducible implementation that has not been 
shown in previous energy-transporting studies. 
III. USAGE SCENARIO 
We envision that users of the system move appliances and 
their remote docks (Fig. 2 left) while the robot autonomously 
finds these repositioned remote docks. One or more robots 
cooperatively provide electric power to one or more home 
appliances (Fig. 2 right). We consider three power-supply 
strategies: greedy, optimistic, and scheduled. The greedy 
strategy, in which a robot delivers its battery power whenever 
available, provides maximum availability for appliances and 
is suitable for devices used sporadically (e.g., mobile TVs). 
The optimistic strategy, in which a robot delivers its 
battery-power when the battery of an appliance is running out, 
provides maximum availability for the robot and is suitable for 
continuously used devices (e.g., floor lamps). The scheduled 
strategy, in which the user provides the desired time and 
duration for a to-be-used device, allows the system to plan an 
efficient trip and is useful for devices regularly used at the 
same time of day (e.g., music players for enjoyment after 
returning home, electric kettles for preparing breakfast). In 
accord with the usage of each appliance, the appropriate 
strategy should be selected by the user. 
   
Figure 2.  Usage Scenario. The user moves an appliance to the desired 
location. The robots distribute their battery power to the appliances. 
The aforementioned strategies are not mutually exclusive. 
A robot can reserve its time slots for charging a scheduled 
appliance while it starts charging for the optimistic strategy 
during unreserved time. The system sends idle robots on a trip 
for greedy charging of an appliance with a reduced battery 
level. In addition, robot tasks other than charging can be 
incorporated into the schedule. For example, a room cleaning 
robot that performs on average a daily one-hour cleaning for a 
room can use its 23 hours of idle time for charging appliances. 
IV. THEORETICAL ANALYSIS 
In this section, we present a theoretical analysis of the 
system. Several issues require consideration because the 
behavior or performance of the system depends on the target 
appliance and each component of the system. Therefore, 
theoretical analyses and deliberations are useful for 
considering the components to instantiate our concept. In the 
following subsections, we specifically describe each of the 
following topics: energy loss rates, relation between charging 
and operating times, continuous operating time limit, 
availability, and output power limit. 
The system involves base units where the robots are 
recharged and appliance-side devices where the robots 
transfer their battery power. We call these the home and 
remote docks, respectively. Fig. 3 shows the key symbols used 
in the theoretical analyses below. There are three kinds of 
energy transfer: electric power from the home dock to the 
robot, battery power from the robot to the remote dock, and 
electric power from the remote dock to the appliance. Each 
type of energy transfer is characterized by the following 
parameters: energy transferred, transfer speed, and transfer 
time. In the following expressions, we use uppercase subscript 
letters to indicate devices (e.g., R for robot, A for appliance) 
and lowercase subscript letters to indicate the channels of a 
device (e.g., c for charge, o for output). Note that all energy 
transfers in the system are performed under DC battery 
voltage and not the AC power from an outlet (e.g., 220V AC). 
 
Figure 3.  Key Symbols in Energy Transfer. 
A. Energy Loss Rates in Remote Dock 
We assume that each remote dock has a battery pack that 
stores electric power for certain duration. This requires the 
consideration of energy losses. A battery pack has internal 
charging and protection circuits that may cause energy loss. In 
addition, a voltage converter is required to consistently 
provide an input voltage to the battery in the appliance-side 
component because the output voltage from the robot battery 
depends on the battery level. Optionally, the battery output 
can be connected to an inverter to generate alternating current 
(AC) for general appliances. Fig. 4 shows a block diagram of 
the energy flow from a robot to an output outlet. The energy 
losses of the converter, battery pack, and inverter should be 
considered; the energy loss rates for these components are 
denoted by L
C
, L
B
, and L
I
, respectively. L
I
 in the following 
equations can be regarded as 1 if the user does not employ an 
inverter. 
6376
  
 
Figure 4.  Energy Losses in Remote Dock. 
B. Relation between Charging and Operating Times 
Next, we consider the charging time for a battery in a 
remote dock. In general, a charging circuit controls the input 
current to be constant for most of the charging time. We 
assume that the battery in a remote dock is charged by a 
constant current. We then obtain the following expression: 
 E
Ac
 = W
Ac
 * t
Ac
, (1) 
where E
Ac
 is the total energy charged, W
Ac
 is the power to be 
charged per time unit (i.e., charging speed), and t
Ac
 is the 
charging time of the appliance battery. 
Note that we confirmed that a battery used for the remote 
dock of our prototype has a constant current characteristic for 
most of the charging time. Fig. 5 plots the accumulation of 
input power during charging with a power cable until the 
battery pack is fully charged. The blue circle in Fig. 5 
indicates the time and level at which the system detected the 
end of constant current charging. After almost two hours of 
constant current charging, the battery level reached 93%. For 
simplification, we decided to use constant current charging 
only and terminated the charging process when the end of this 
charging mode was detected. 
 
Figure 5.  Constant Current Characteristic of  the Appliance Battery. 
Next, we model the output from the remote dock. The 
average power consumption is usually provided for 
appliances. By using this value, we obtain the following 
expression: 
 E
Ao
 = W
Ao
 * t
Ao
, (2) 
where E
Ao
 is the total energy consumed, W
Ao
 is the average 
power consumption, and t
Ao
 is the time of use of the appliance. 
The charged energy and output energy are related as follows 
using the loss rates modeled in the previous subsection: 
 E
Ao
 = E
Ac
 * L
C
 * L
B
 * L
I
. (3) 
Therefore, we obtain the following expression 
 t
Ac
 = (1/W
Ac
) * (1/L
C
L
B
L
I
) * W
Ao
 * t
Ao
. (4) 
We can measure W
Ac
 once the battery is determined. 
Therefore, we can estimate the sufficient charging time by 
using (4), given the average consumption power and time of 
use. This is useful for planning a scheduled trip. 
C. Continuous Operating Time 
By viewing (4) from a different perspective, we can obtain 
the following expression: 
 t
Ao_single
 = (W
Ac
/W
Ao
) * L
C
L
B
L
I
 * t
Ac_single
, (5) 
where t
Ao_single
 denotes the continuous operating time with the 
energy stored by single power transfer from a fully charged 
robot to a remote dock, and t
Ac_single
 denotes the time required 
for single power transfer from a fully charged robot to a 
remote dock. We can empirically measure the charging speed 
W
Ac
 and the time required by the robot to charge the remote 
dock t
Ac_single
. Hence, we can calculate the operating time of 
the appliance after a robot trip. 
We also consider a further operating time limit. From the 
specifications of the appliance battery, we obtain the capacity 
of the battery and calculate the operating time by using the 
fully charged remote dock battery as follows: 
 t
Ao_max
 = E
Ab_max
 * L
I
  / W
Ao
, (6) 
where t
Ao_max
 denotes the continuous operating time using the 
fully charged appliance battery, and E
Ab_max
 denotes the total 
energy that the battery can store. Equation (6) is useful for 
determining how long the appliance can operate with a greedy 
charging strategy. 
D. Availability 
As shown for t
Ac_single
, we can also measure the time 
required to fully charge the robot t
Rc_single
. By using these 
values, we can derive the availability of the appliance A
A
, 
which we define as the time of operation (as a ratio of the total 
unit time) during which the system attempts to provide 
maximum energy to the appliance. For example, if A
A
 is 0.5, 
the appliance can be used for a maximum of 12 h/day. If A
A
 is 
1, the user can continuously use the appliance all the time. 
We first treat the input and output factors of the remote 
dock separately to consider availability. The input factor is 
related to how much the system can assign the robots to charge 
the remote dock. In the case of a single robot, the robot 
maximally provides electric power when it repeatedly charges 
the remote dock battery and recharges its own battery. 
Therefore, the input factor is determined by the ratio of the 
charging time of the remote dock to the cycle time of one 
round trip made by the robot as follows: 
 input factor single = t
Ac_single
 / (t
Rc_single
 + t
Ac_single
). (7) 
In the case of two or more robots, after one robot finishes 
charging, another can start charging. Hence, the numerator of 
the input factor is multiplied by the number of robots. 
However, the input factor cannot exceed 1. Therefore, we can 
derive the following expression: 
6377
  
 input factor = min(1,t
Ac_single
 * n / (t
Rc_single
 + t
Ac_single
)), (8) 
where n denotes the number of robots. For example, for robots 
whose t
Rc_single
 is 3 and t
Ac_single
 is 2, the input factor is 0.4 with 
a single robot, 0.8 with two robots, and 1 with three or more 
robots. The output factor is related to how long the remote 
dock can operate the appliance, and determined by the ratio of 
the operating time to the charging time. 
 output factor = t
Ao_single
 / t
Ac_single
. (9) 
Again, by considering that availability cannot exceed 1, we 
finally derive the following expression to calculate 
availability A
A
 by multiplying the input and output factors: 
 . (10) 
Using (5), (10) is expanded to 
 . (11) 
All symbols except W
Ao
 in (11) are constants for certain 
batteries in the robots and remote docks. Hence, the 
availability is determined by the power consumption of the 
appliance once the user determines the robots and remote 
docks. 
E. Output Power Limit 
Another limit concerns power consumption. Given that a 
typical battery pack has an output current limit for safety 
considerations, the final output from the inverter is also 
limited as follows: 
 W
Ao_max
 = W
Ab_max
 * L
I
, (12) 
where W
Ao_max
 is the limit of the final output from the inverter 
and W
Ab_max
 is the limit specification of the battery output from 
the inverter. To use high-power appliances, the user must 
select a high-performance battery for the appliance battery. 
V. IMPLEMENTATION 
We implement a proof-of-concept system that employs 
one robot and one appliance dock. The robot finds the 
appliance dock completely autonomously. We also design the 
dock-finding method in a way that makes it extendable to 
multiple robots and appliances.  
A. Hardware 
The user-visible parts of the system are mainly divided 
into three components: a battery-charging robot, a home dock, 
and a remote dock (Fig. 6). All three components are 
wirelessly connected to a host computer through Wi-Fi 
infrastructure. For the battery-charging robot, we employ an 
iRobot Roomba [11] modified to bypass its battery terminals 
to outside the robot. The battery terminals, which are attached 
to the front of the robot, make contact with the terminals on 
the remote dock (Fig. 7). The robot also has a circuit board to 
monitor the output current and voltage of the battery and to 
switch the bypass line for safety during exploration. 
 
Figure 6.  System Configuration. 
 
Figure 7.  Battery-Charging Robot. 
We use Roomba charging docks for the home and remote 
docks. A charging dock has a set of beacon transmitters used 
by a Roomba to find its location. We use this beacon 
mechanism to enable the robot to explore and find the target 
dock autonomously. To move the robot to a dock in the 
environment, the system turns on the target dock, turns off the 
other docks, and has the robot search for the target dock with 
its preprogrammed behavior (Fig. 8). 
 
Figure 8.  Time Division Switching of Robot Docks. 
The home dock is connected to an outlet to provide 
electric power to the robot, and comes with a circuit board that 
switches the power of the dock (Fig. 9). The remote dock 
contains a battery to store electric power for driving an 
appliance as described earlier, a circuit board with current 
sensors to monitor the input/output of electric power, and a 
relay to switch the power of the dock (Fig. 10). Fig. 11 shows 
the parts on the circuit board. A microcontroller on the circuit 
board estimates the battery level on the basis of the values 
from the current sensors. The microcontroller also controls the 
dock power for robot navigation. 
 
Figure 9.  Home Dock for Recharging the Robot. 
6378
  
 
Figure 10.  Remote Dock to Store Battery Power for Appliance. 
 
Figure 11.  Parts on the Circuit Board of the Remote Dock. 
B. Parameters 
In this section, we describe the specifications of the 
prototype implementation. We also derive specific formulas 
by using the parameters obtained from measurements or 
specifications in the expressions of Section IV. 
We first measured the energy loss rates. For that of the 
voltage converter (L
C
), we measured its typical input/output 
voltage and current and obtained an input of 14.4 V, 1250 mA 
and an output of 19.0 V, 900 mA. Therefore, L
C
 is given as 
 L
C
 = (19.0 V * 900 mA) / (14.4 V * 1250 mA)  
 = 17.1 W / 18.0 W = 0.95. (13) 
For the energy loss rate of the battery pack (L
B
), we measured 
its typical input/output voltage and current and the time 
required for its full charge/discharge. For the input and output, 
we obtained 19.0 V, 900 mA, 2.0 h and 12 V, 574 mA, 4.5 h, 
respectively. Therefore, L
B
 is given as 
 L
B
 = (12 V * 574 mA * 4.5 h) / (19 V * 900 mA * 2.0 h)  
 = 30.1 Wh / 34.2 Wh = 0.88. (14) 
For the energy loss rate of the inverter (L
I
), the typical output 
currents of the battery pack for driving an appliance (fan) with 
and without the inverter were 574 and 331 mA, respectively. 
Therefore, L
I
 is given as 
 L
I
 = 331 mA / 574 mA = 0.58. (15) 
The battery-charging speed for the remote dock (W
Ac
) is 
calculated by the input voltage and current to the remote dock. 
As described earlier, we obtain W
Ac
 as 
 W
Ac
?= 14.4 V * 1250 mA = 18.0 W. (16) 
 We next measured the time required by a fully charged 
robot battery to charge a remote dock (t
Ac_single
). We manually 
placed the fully charged robot on the empty remote dock and 
found that the robot battery was depleted after two hours. 
Given the discharge required for a robot to make a single 
round trip, we set the charging time to 1.8 h. 
 t
Ac_single
?= 1.8 h (17) 
We also measured the time required to fully charge the 
robot battery t
Rc_single
. Fig. 12 plots the accumulation of the 
input power until the robot was fully charged. We confirmed 
that 2.8 h was required to fully charge the robot battery. 
 t
Rc_single
?= 2.8 h (18) 
 
Figure 12.  Constant Current Characteristic of  the Robot Battery. 
Note that the robot battery used has a constant current 
characteristic throughout the course of charging. The battery 
level reached 100% by constant current charging. 
Next, we examined the specifications of the battery pack 
to find its capacity E
Ab_max
. Given that charging is terminated 
at 93% of the battery level (Section IV.B), the capacity is 
multiplied by 0.93 to calculate E
Ab_max
 as 
 E
Ab_max
?= 3.7 V * 8000 mAh * 0.93 = 27.5 Wh. (19) 
Finally, we examined the battery specifications to find the 
battery output limit W
Ab_max
 as 
 W
Ab_max
?= 12 V * 2000 mA = 24.0 W. (20) 
Applying the parameters in (13)–(20) to (4), (5), (6), (11), 
and (12), we obtain the following specific expressions for our 
prototype implementation. 
 t
Ac
 = 0.115 * W
Ao
 * t
Ao
 [h] (21) 
 t
Ao_single
 = 15.71 / W
Ao
 [h] (22) 
 t
Ao_max
 = 15.95 / W
Ao
 [h] (23) 
 A
A
 = 3.42 / W
Ao
 (24) 
 W
Ao_max
 = 13.92 [W] (25) 
C. Scheduling Control 
We additionally implemented a smartphone application to 
register strategies and schedules. Fig. 13 shows screenshots of 
6379
  
the application. The top level of the interface shows a list of 
remote docks (Fig. 13 left). Tapping an item in the list leads to 
a setting screen (Fig. 13 right), in which the user enters a name, 
a strategy, and optional start/end times. The name is an alias 
for the user to distinguish the remote dock. The strategy is the 
charging strategy for the remote dock. Selecting a scheduled 
strategy enables forms for the start and end times, which are 
used to plan a scheduled trip. When the user taps the “Save” 
button, the application sends this information to the host 
computer controlling the system, and the scheduled trip is 
reserved. In particular, the system calculates the charging time 
(t
Ac
) according to (21) with the required use time (t
Ao
) and last 
power consumption (W
Ao
). The system adds 15% of the 
theoretically estimated charging time as a buffer charging time. 
The system also adds further 10 minutes for a round trip to the 
buffered charging time. Hence, the trip begins at a time that 
precedes the start time by 115% of the theoretically estimated 
charging time + 10 minutes. 
     
Figure 13.  Smartphone Application for Strategy and Schedule Registration. 
VI. VALIDATION STUDY 
We empirically investigated the prototype implementation 
to validate the theoretical analysis. The experiment was 
conducted from three perspectives: expressions, scheduled 
trips, and reliability. As a baseline, we first measured the 
output load by using an off-the-shelf fan as the output device. 
The wind strength could be adjusted to one of eight levels, and 
the direction of the head could be periodically changed. We 
used the fan in three conditions: weak (level 3) wind (Weak 
condition), strong (level 8) wind (Strong condition), and 
strong (level 8) wind with head motion (Strong+Motion 
condition). We connected its original power cable and 
measured the input voltage and current. With a 12 V input, the 
currents were 226, 853, and 1096 mA in the Weak, Strong, 
and Strong+Motion conditions, respectively. Hence, the 
required power (W
Ao
) values for each condition were 2.71, 
10.24, and 13.15 W, respectively. These values were used in 
the evaluations below. 
A. Validation of Formulas 
We tested whether the prototype worked as expected by 
theoretically derived formulas (Table I). 
We first checked the relation between the charging and 
output times. For each operating condition, we operated the 
fan until the battery was depleted after the robot had charged 
the remote dock battery for 30 minutes of use (t
Ao
). The 
theoretical charging times (t
Ac
) were calculated by (21) as 0.16, 
0.59, and 0.76 h for the corresponding conditions. Two tests 
were conducted for each condition in this and all subsequent 
experiments except availability. 
The fan was operated for 31 and 29 min on each trial in the 
Weak condition, 34 and 37 min on each trial in the Strong 
condition, 35 and 32 min on each trial in the Strong+Motion 
condition. 
Similarly, we checked the continuous operating time. For 
each operating condition, we operated the fan until the battery 
was depleted after the fully charged robot had transferred all 
of its power to the remote dock. The theoretical operating 
times (t
Ao_single
) were calculated by (22) as 5.80, 1.53, and 1.19 
h for the corresponding conditions. 
The fan was operated for 5.85 and 5.77 h on each trial in 
the Weak condition, 1.70 and 1.73 h on each trial in the Strong 
condition, and 1.28 and 1.17 h on each trial in the 
Strong+Motion condition. 
We also checked the continuous operating time after full 
charging of the remote dock. For each operating condition, we 
operated the fan until the battery was depleted after the robot 
completed charging of the remote dock. Two trips were 
required to fully charge the remote dock battery. The 
theoretical operating times (t
Ao_max
) were calculated by (23) as 
5.89, 1.56, and 1.21 h for the corresponding conditions. 
The fan was operated for 6.03 and 6.01 h on each trial in 
the Weak condition, 1.59 and 1.65 h on each trial in the Strong 
condition, and 1.28 and 1.24 h on each trial in the 
Strong+Motion condition. 
We next tested the availability as given by (24). The 
system was run for three rounds of charging the remote dock. 
We prepared an empty remote dock and turned on the fan at 
the beginning of the first charging. Each time the robot 
completed charging during this test, we turned on the fan 
again if the fan was not operating due to depletion. We 
measured the total operating time to calculate the availability 
(A
A
). The expected values of availability were 1.00, 0.33, and 
0.26 for the corresponding conditions. 
The total operating times for corresponding conditions 
were 9.8, 4.5, and 3.5 h. The total times elapsed were 9.8, 13.8, 
TABLE I.  SUMMARY OF VALIDATION OF FOMULAS 
Condition W Ao t Ac for 30-min t Ao t Ao for left t Ac t Ao_single t Ao_max A A 
Weak 
theoretical - 0.16 30 min 5.80 5.89 1.00 
mesured 2.71 - 31 min 29 min 5.85 5.77 6.03 6.01 1.00 
Strong 
theoretical - 0.59 30 min 1.53 1.56 0.33 
mesured 10.24 - 34 min 37 min 1.70 1.73 1.59 1.65 0.33 
Strong+Motion 
theoretical - 0.76 30 min 1.19 1.21 0.26 
mesured 13.15 - 35 min 32 min 1.28 1.17 1.28 1.24 0.26 
 
6380
  
and 13.8 h, and hence the measured availability values were 
1.00, 0.33, and 0.26, respectively. We note that the second and 
third charge in the Weak condition finished earlier than usual 
(1.0 h each). As a special case, we additionally operated the 
fan in the Weak condition for three days to test whether it 
could operate continuously. The fan continued to operate 
successfully for 29 rounds of charging as if connected to a 
power cable. 
In the previous experiment, the fan was shown to consume 
13.15 W in the Strong+Motion condition. With a Wi-Fi router 
connected to the remote dock by an inverter, the router failed 
to start. With the router connected directly to the remote dock 
without an inverter, the fan correctly functioned with an 
average output current of 1375 mA (i.e., power consumption 
of 16.50 W). These results indicate that the prototype has an 
output limitation described in (25). 
B. Validation of Scheduled Trips 
We tested the behavior of the system during scheduled 
trips. For three days, we registered the fan to operate in the 
Strong condition for one hour begging at 6 pm each day. 
Given that the required charging time was 1.18 h (i.e., 71 min) 
from (21), the robot was expected to begin a trip 92 min (71 
min (theoretical) + 11 min (15% buffer) + 10 min (round trip)) 
before 6 pm, i.e., at 4:28pm (Section V.C). 
As expected, the robot began the trip at 4:28 pm each day. 
The times at which the robot returned to the home dock varied 
slightly (5:53, 5:51, and 5:54 pm). This is because the 
navigation time between the home and the remote dock was 
not fixed. The battery of the remote dock was thus sufficiently 
charged because the fan could be operated until 7 pm each 
day. 
C. Reliability 
In the previous two experiments, the robot was moved a 
total of 118 times to the other dock in a 5 m ? 5 m environment. 
On each trial, the robot successfully reached the other dock. It 
required 104 seconds on average and a maximum of 195 
seconds to complete a trip. 
VII. DISCUSSION AND LIMITATIONS 
The maximum output power of our current 
implementation is only 13.92 W, in which case the operation 
time is only 1.15 h. This means that the current prototype can 
serve only limited low-power consumption devices such as 
fans, lamps, and certain low-power computers for a relatively 
short time. To reduce this limitation, batteries with higher 
capacity and charging speed can be used. This battery change 
is unlikely to require a change in the configuration of the 
system. In addition, the robot may have a powerful battery 
separate from its internal battery. Although this requires a 
slight change in configuration (i.e., a home dock requires two 
charging circuits), we can independently select the additional 
battery regardless of the internal battery and avoid the ad hoc 
discharge adjustment for robot navigation (2.0 h to 1.8 h in 
(17)). A further possible change in the future is that each 
appliance will have a battery and a charging dock. This will 
eliminate the need for the inverter and allow the appliance to 
use a higher output from the appliance battery. 
Although we focused on presenting the concept and a 
feasible implementation in this paper, the system can be 
extended or optimized to suit the user’s preferences. For 
example, the user may want the robot to move only when the 
user is outside. A potential extension for this is to provide a 
user interface that registers the preferred time or directly 
notifies the system if the robot can move. As future work, we 
also plan to conduct a user study with the implemented system 
to investigate such user preferences. We hope to obtain 
insights for practical use and discover further avenues of 
research. 
VIII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed the concept of a 
power-delivering mobile robot and a battery management 
system for home appliances. We demonstrated a 
proof-of-concept implementation by using an off-the-shelf 
robot, battery, and appliance, and showed that the proposed 
concept was feasible in a typical environment. By considering 
the parameters described (Section IV), developers can select 
components of the system according to appliance usage. 
The demonstrated technique may change how the 
deployment of appliances is determined. If appliances that 
contain a battery and docking terminals increase, we can 
expect to see more cable-less appliances that are freely placed 
in the future. We believe that the demonstrated technique 
offers an opportunity to reconsider daily life in future home 
environments with mobile home robots. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Garrett, R.K. and Danziger, J.N.: Which Telework? Defining and 
Testing a Taxonomy of Technology-Mediated Work at a Distance. 
Social Science Computer Review, Vol.25, No.1, pp.27–47, 2007. 
[2] Norman Makoto Su, Gloria Mark, Designing for nomadic work, 
Proceedings of the 7th ACM conference on Designing interactive 
systems, p.305-314, 2008. 
[3] M. C. Silverman, D. Nies, B. Jung, and G. S. Sukatme, “Staying alive: 
A docking station for autonomous robot recharging,” in Proceedings of 
the 2002 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 
Washington, DC, May 2002, pp. 1050–1055. 
[4] Wim Meeussen, Melonee Wise, Stuart Glaser, Sachin Chitta, Conor 
McGann, Patrick Mihelich, Eitan Marder-Eppstein, Marius Muja, 
Victor Eruhimov, Tully Foote, John Hsu, Radu Bogdan Rusu, 
Bhaskara Marthi, Gary Bradski, Kurt Konolige, Brian Gerkey, Eric 
Berger. Autonomous Door Opening and Plugging In with a Personal 
Robot. ICRA 2010. 
[5] Brain Mayton, Louis LeGrand, Joshua R. Smith. Robot, Feed Thyself: 
Plugging In to Unmodified Electrical Outlets by Sensing Emitted AC 
Electric Fields. ICRA 2010. 
[6] Victor Eruhimov, Wim Meeussen. Outlet detection and pose estimation 
for robot continuous operation. IROS 2011. 
[7] Pawel Zebrowski, Richard T. Vaughan. Recharging Robot Teams: A 
Tanker Approach. ICAR 2005. 
[8] Trung Dung Ngo, Hector Raposo, Henrik Schiøler. Potentially 
Distributable Energy: Towards Energy Autonomy in Large Population 
of Mobile Robots. CIRA 2007. 
[9] Andrew Drenner, Michael Janssen, and Nikolaos Papanikolopoulos. 
Coordinating Recharging of Large Scale Robotic Teams. IROS 2009. 
[10] C. Carlson, A. Drenner, I. Burt, and N. Papanikolopoulos, “Modular 
mobile docking station design,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robot Systems, 2006. 
[11] iRobot Roomba, 
http://www.irobot.com/en/us/robots/home/roomba.aspx 
 
6381
