Robots Using Environment Objects as Tools
The ‘MacGyver’ Paradigm for Mobile Manipulation
Mike Stilman Can Erdogan Saul Reynolds-Haertle
Munzir Zafar Peng Hou Gregory Tracy
Abstract—Mobile manipulators and humanoid robots
should have the ability to use objects in their environments. Pre-
vious work has shown signiﬁcant advantages to robots that can
remove objects that interfere with their goal. We propose the
next step. Just like the ﬁctional character ‘MacGyver,’ robots
should construct simple machines and tools from arbitrary
objects. This video presents our progress in developing and
validating ’MacGyver’ skills in a simulated rescue mission.
Mobile Manipulators and Humanoid Robots have the distinct
capacity for both motion and manipulation. While often
used independently, we previously introduced the domain of
Navigation Among Movable Obstacles (NAMO) [1] which
allowed robots to use manipulation to move obstacles out
of the way and assist navigation. Continued work includes
the ﬁrst NAMO implementation, onboard perception and
research on manipulation in clutter [2]–[4]. However, in all
these cases environment objects were treated as obstacles.
We now take the next step by giving robots the capability to
use environment objects and complete task-level missions.
Just like the ﬁctional character ‘MacGyver’ who uses
arbitrary environment objects to construct simple machines,
we propose that robots should also take advantage of objects
that they ﬁnd. For instance, robots could use a random
board as a lever, a bridge or a wedge. Humans regularly
beneﬁt from their ability to use environment objects and
now we present the same paradigm as a research area in
robotics. Our work is primarily on planning and autonomous
decision making [5]. In this video we evaluate actual robot
capabilities on Golem Krang, discuss required elements,
challenges and areas of research.
In this experiment, we design a complete rescue scenario
with a 100kg brick object blocking entry to a room and
another 100kg loaded cart. Interestingly, the loaded cart
becomes a fulcrum for an arbitrary board to topple the
bricks. Then the bricks, which were initially an obstacle, are
used as a fulcrum for a lever to pry open the door. Finally
the robot uses a wider board to create a bridge and perform
the simulated rescue.
To analyze the feasibility and challenges of our new
domain we use partial autonomy. Robot actions are directed
by teleoperation of location, and workspace gripper position.
Balance is autonomously controlled and expanded to incor-
porate external environment forces arising from object mass
and the forces applied during each environment interaction.
The importance of autonomous dynamic balance appears in
two forms: First, the robot uses its entire body to lean into
the two demonstrated lever actions. Furthermore it is able to
comply and recover from the impulse and force applied in
opening the door via Kalman ﬁltering of experienced forces.
Robotics and Intelligent Machines, Georgia Institute of Technology,
USA. Email: mstilman@cc.gatech.edu, cerdogan3@gatech.edu,
saulrh@gatech.edu, mzafar7@gatech.edu, dustsnow@gmail.com,
gtracy@emory.edu; This work was supported by ONR N000141210143.
Fig. 1. Humanoid robot Golem Krang uses a makeshift lever from a 2x4
and an obstacle as the fulcrum to displace a 100kg brick object.
Object Suitability: The robot must determine whether
an object is suitable for a task. In bi-manual interaction,
our robot keeps a consistent relationship between its arms
and grippers and uses active compliance to prevent internal
forces. Yet, generating internal forces and applying them to
an object is a useful method for testing its tensile strength.
Utilizing Physics: Typical robots cannot move 100kg ob-
jects. Yet, Krang grasps a 2x4 board, creates a lever and
leans into it with his entire mass. The relationship between
distance and torque created by the lever makes it possible to
achieve two displacements. Also, re-grasping the lever can
be achieved in the air since gravity and friction ensure the
board stays in a given conﬁguration while the robot moves
its grippers. Re-grasping is automated in our system.
Local Linearization: An interesting challenge in this
experiment was opening the door with the lever. Due to the
highly constrained space and Krang’s non-holonomic motion
it was essential that Krang, the fulcrum and the door be po-
sitioned precisely so that the forward motion would locally
generate the greatest force/impulse on the door. Future work
will reason about such linearization autonomously.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Stilman and J. Kuffner, “Navigation among movable obstacles:
Real-time reasoning in complex environments,” in IEEE/RAS Interna-
tional Conference on Humanoid Robotics, pp. 322–341, 2004.
[2] M. Stilman, K. Nishiwaki, S. Kagami, and J. Kuffner, “Planning and
executing navigation among movable obstacles,” in IEEE/RSJ Int.
Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1617–1634, 2006.
[3] M. Dogar and S. Srinivasa, “A framework for push-grasping in clutter,”
Robotics: Science and Systems VII, 2011.
[4] K. Youhei, R. Ueda, K. Kazuya, K. Okada, and M. Inaba, “Work-
ing with movable obstacles using on-line environment perception
reconstruction using active sensing and color range sensor,” in IEEE
Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1696–1701, IEEE, 2010.
[5] C. Erdogan and M. Stilman, “Planning in constraint space: Automated
design of functional structures,” inIEEE/RSJInternationalConference
on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1799–1804, May 2013.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2568
