Towards Control and Sensing for an autonomous Mobile Robotic
Assistant navigating Assembly Lines
Vaibhav V . Unhelkar
1
, Jorge Perez
1
, James C. Boerkoel Jr.
2
, Johannes Bix
3
,
Stefan Bartscher
3
and Julie A. Shah
1
AbstractÑ There exists an increasing demand to incorporate
mobile interactive robots to assist humans in repetitive, non-
value added tasks in the manufacturing domain. Our aim is to
develop a mobile robotic assistant for fetch-and-deliver tasks
in human-oriented assembly line environments. Assembly lines
present a niche yet novel challenge for mobile robots; the robot
must precisely control its position on a surface which may be
either stationary, moving, or split (e.g. in the case that the robot
straddles the moving assembly line and remains partially on the
stationary surface).
In this paper we present a control and sensing solution for a
mobile robotic assistant as it traverses a moving-ßoor assembly
line. Solutions readily exist for control of wheeled mobile
robots on static surfaces; we build on the open-source Robot
Operating System (ROS) software architecture and generalize
the algorithms for the moving line environment. Off-the-shelf
sensors and localization algorithms are explored to sense the
moving surface, and a customized solution is presented using
PX4Flow optic ßow sensors and a laser scanner-based localiza-
tion algorithm. Validation of the control and sensing system is
carried out both in simulation and in hardware experiments on
a customized treadmill. Initial demonstrations of the hardware
system yield promising results; the robot successfully maintains
its position while on, and while straddling, the moving line.
I. INTRODUCTION
To cater to the needs of modern factories, industrial robots
are increasingly becoming more mobile [1], [2], adaptive [3]
and human-oriented [4], [5]. We are removing the cages that
separate them from people and are now deploying them into
human-centric factory environments. Some assembly work,
such as automotive Þnal assembly, involves complex and
highly dexterous tasks that still require human capabilities.
However, near-term opportunities exist to improve the pro-
ductivity of people in performing Òvalue-added workÓ by
deploying robots to perform the Ònon-value-added work.Ó
This paper explores one such opportunity, which is to
Þeld a mobile robotic assistant that travels across a factory,
delivering tools and materials to the human workers. Assem-
bly manufacturing facilities, such as in the automotive and
aerospace sectors, tend to be quite large in area and often
require multiple deliveries of parts over long distances and
at regular intervals. An adept mobile robotic assistant can
provide a signiÞcant boost to human worker productivity by
*Corresponding author: unhelkar@mit.edu
1
V . V . Unhelkar, J. Perez and J. A. Shah are with the Computer Science
and ArtiÞcial Intelligence Lab, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, Massachusetts,
2
J. C. Boerkoel Jr. is with the Computer Science Department, Harvey
Mudd College, California,
3
J. Bix and S. Bartscher are with the Innovation Production Division,
BMW Group, Munich, Germany.
transporting these items, thereby freeing the worker to focus
on the tasks that require their human capabilities. Ideally the
introduction of mobile robotic assistants would require min-
imal modiÞcations to the factory layout and infrastructure,
thus preserving operational ßexibility as compared to Þxed
infrastructure solutions.
There is a breadth of prior work aimed at designing and
deploying robots as assistants, for example in health-care
[6]Ð[8], in recreational environments such as museums and
shopping malls [9]Ð[11], and in the home [12], [13]. In
this work, we aim to develop a mobile robotic assistant to
perform fetch-and-deliver tasks in a human-oriented assem-
bly line environment. Successful deployment of a mobile
robotic assistant on the factory ßoor requires mechanisms
(both hardware and software) to ensure the safety of the
human associates. To provide beneÞt, the robotic assistant
requires navigation, path planning, deliberative task plan-
ning/scheduling, and human interface capabilities, ensuring
delivery of the right materials to the point-of-use at the right
time [14], [15]. However, prior to accomplishing any task
on the assembly line, the robot Þrst needs to be able to
traverse a moving conveyor belt (see Fig. 1). This requires
that it precisely control its position on a surface which may
be either stationary, moving, or split (e.g. in the case that
the robot straddles the moving assembly line and remains
partially on the stationary surface).
In this paper, we describe a solution for the autonomous
control of the mobile robotic assistant as it traverses a
moving-ßoor assembly line. The Rob@Work 3 mobile base
[16] is used as the basic platform to develop and demonstrate
these custom capabilities. The Rob@Work 3 mobile robot
Fig. 1. A typical automotive assembly line with a moving surface.
(Photo Credits: https://www.press.bmwgroup.com/)
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4161
supports navigation in static environments, and comes with
both proprietary and open-source solutions for its basic
operation. In this work we build on the open-source Robot
Operating System (ROS) [17] software architecture and
generalize the algorithms for the moving line environment.
Wherever possible, off-the-shelf sensors and algorithms are
customized and integrated for the application at hand.
We begin by describing the Rob@Work 3 robot platform,
its hardware and software capabilities, as well as introduce
the additional sensors necessary to perform navigation and
control on the assembly line. Next in Section III we describe
the control architecture and the modiÞcations that enable re-
action to sensed belt rates. Sensing of the moving surface and
the robot state is a prerequisite for successful implementation
of the controller; hence, possible sensing alternatives along
with details of implementation are presented in Section IV .
Lastly, the developed system is tested via both simulation and
hardware (Sections V and VI). Gazebo robot simulator [18]
is Þrst used to validate the control system in simulation. The
control and sensing subsystem is implemented on robot hard-
ware, and Þrst validation with off-board sensing is conducted
on an analogue assembly line using a customized treadmill.
The paper concludes with a discussion of the performance
of the current system, its limitations and possible directions
for further improvement.
II. ROB@WORK 3: MOBILE ROBOTIC BASE
Rob@Work 3 is a mobile robotic platform, developed by
Fraunhofer IPA
R 
, for industrial applications (see Fig. 2). For
its motion the mobile base uses four independently actuated
wheels; each wheel has two motors providing degrees of
freedom in steering (via steering angle, y) and driving (via
angular rate,
ú
q). Sensing is achieved by encoders at each
of the eight wheel motors and two SICK S300 laser scan-
ners
1
. The odometry information is obtained using the eight
encoders, which is then combined with the laser scanners to
perform localization and mapping.
Robot Operating System (ROS) is used as the middleware
for the robotic platform
2
. Safety features, at both the soft-
ware and hardware level, are pre-built into the robot thus
providing the basic measures for ensuring its safe operation
in human environments. The ROS middleware also provides
easy access to the open-source library of various robotics
algorithms, which can be used off-the-shelf or customized
for the mobile base. The existing software of Rob@Work
3 is capable of motion planning and navigation in static
domains using the aforesaid sensors, actuators and widely
used robotics algorithms for localization [19], mapping [20]
and navigation [21]. Table I provides the salient features of
the Rob@Work 3 platform.
A. Problem Description: Navigating Assembly Lines
The basic robotic platform, through the aforementioned
features, can capably navigate in static, known environments.
However, navigating an assembly line additionally requires
1
http://goo.gl/VwoA42
2
http://wiki.ros.org/care-o-bot
Fig. 2. The modiÞed Rob@Work 3 mobile robotic platform, with four
optic ßow sensors for augmented surface sensing capabilities.
the robot to control its location and velocity on a moving
surface. At any time, the robot may be entirely on, entirely
off, or else straddling the moving surface. These unconven-
tional but practical scenarios require additional sensing and
a customized control algorithm for the robotic mobile base.
In this work we assume the location of the assembly line
in the factory is known and static. A number of exogenous
factors inßuence the stopping and starting of the assembly
line. Factories oriented around manual work do not typically
maintain a reliable signal of the linesÕ on/off state and thus
this state must be sensed directly by the robot. However,
when on, the assembly line moves at an almost constant
velocity (10% variation). Other objects in the factory (part
carts, cars, people) will move over different timescales and
the robot will need localization and path planning algorithms
that are suitable for dynamic environments. In this initial
effort we assume these objects are static and focus on the
problem of control and sensing on the assembly line belt. Our
sensing and control sub-systems are designed to be modular,
so that they can be coupled with a variety of localization,
mapping and navigation algorithms.
Augmentation of Hardware: We augment the robot mobile
base by installing a suite of four PX4Flow optic ßow
sensors [22] to provide the additional sensing of the state
of the moving line. This augmented system, along with its
selection, technical details, and performance, is presented
next.
TABLE I
ROB@WORK 3: SALIENT FEATURES
Dimensions 103 57 40 cm
Weight 120 kg
Payload Capacity 150 kg
Maximum Speed 1.2 m/s
Actuators 4 wheels (2 motors per wheel,
for driving and steering)
Sensors Eight encoders (1 per motor)
2 SICK S300 Laser Scanners
4162
B. Reference Frames
The robot, due to its numerous parts and sensors, requires
maintenance of over Þfteen reference frames for its complete
kinematic description. Primarily, three reference frames are
used in the following sections: map, robot, and optic
i
. The
map frame, denoted by superscript M and used as reference
for localization, is the static frame Þxed to a reference point
in the factory. The robot frame, denoted by superscript R,
is Þxed to the robot body, and is used for maintaining the
robot odometry and location with respect to the static world
frame. Finally, a reference frame is deÞned for each of the
four optic ßow sensors. This is used to suitably transform
the sensor information into the robot frame.
III. CONTROL
The control architecture of the mobile base uses multiple
feedback loops [23]. A path planning algorithm (or a human
teleoperator) issues a desired trajectory, which is translated
into velocity commands for the mobile robot. The desired
velocity of the i
th
wheel v
R
wheel,i
= (v
x,i
;v
y,i
) is obtained in
terms of robot velocity ( ú x
r
; ú y
r
;
ú
f
r
) as follows,
v
x,i
= ú x
r
 
ú
f
r
y
w,i
(1a)
v
y,i
= ú y
r
+
ú
f
r
x
w,i
: (1b)
Each wheel velocity command is then converted to the
wheel conÞguration, a steering angle y and angular rate
ú
q
command, as detailed in [23]. The existing PD controller is
used for controlling y and
ú
q for each wheel. The control
architecture, implemented in ROS, incorporates basic safety
considerations that are essential while operating in an indus-
trial environment. We modify the existing wheel controller,
rather than design anew, to preserve these in-built safety
features.
The nominal wheel controllers, described above, operate
assuming the commands are issued for the case of static
surface. Hence, if any of the wheels are on a moving surface,
the nominal controller will not provide the desired response.
To overcome this issue, we compensate the command for
each wheel (v
R
wheel,i
) based on the absolute surface velocity
at its point of contact (v
R
surf,i
). Algorithm 1 describes how
the commanded velocity for each wheel is altered assuming
the knowledge of surface velocity. The modiÞed wheel
velocity command is used to compute the desired wheel
conÞguration (y,
ú
q). This modiÞcation preserves use of the
existing software architecture and wheel controller.
Input: Nominal command to the wheel controller
Output: Compensated command to the wheel controller
foreach robot wheel do
sense absolute surface velocity (v
R
surf,i
) at wheel;
modify the nominal command:-
v
R
wheel,i
= v
R
wheel,i
- v
R
surf,i
;
end
Algorithm 1: ModiÞcation to the nominal wheel controller
command for navigating Assembly Lines
IV. PERCEPTION
As described in Sec. III, information about surface velocity
is essential for the modiÞed controller. Further, an alternate
method is required for localization since odometry degrades
when the robot is navigating on moving surfaces.
A. Sensing Surface Velocity
Sensing surface velocity requires additional hardware for
the robotic platform. A number of different sensing options
exist for velocity estimation of surrounding objects. For in-
stance, various types of radars are used to measure velocities
of cars, or to detect aerial objects. Typically robotic systems
use vision (both stereo and rgbd) algorithms to estimate
velocity of surrounding objects. In our application, the robot
is always in contact with the surface, and therefore contact
sensors, too, may be used for detecting surface velocity.
Surface motion can also be detected indirectly by comparing
two independent sources of localization, one linked to the
map reference frame (such as, inertial sensors) while the
other linked to the local robot frame (such as, odometry).
Sensing Alternatives: Constrained by size and power re-
quirements, we explored the use of four different sensors for
measuring surface velocity: miniature radars [24], optic ßow
sensors [22], contact-based encoders, and inertial sensors.
As the surface moves relatively slowly (usually < 0:2 m/s),
the performance of miniature radars and low-cost inertial
sensors is limited by accuracies at low speeds. Further, an
indirect method (such as, inertial sensor based system) will
be reactive, detecting surface motion only via disturbance
in the robotÕs motion caused by the surface. An on-board
contact sensor will negatively affect the ground clearance of
the robot, limiting its mobility over uneven surfaces. Hence,
in our work, we evaluate the use optic ßow sensors to detect
surface velocity.
Sensing via Optic Flow: The PX4Flow is a CMOS image
based optical sensor designed for mobile robotic applica-
tions, including aerial vehicles [22]. The sensor includes
a microcontroller, image sensor, gyroscope and sonar with
on-board processing, and interfaces with the robot through
ROS
3
. The image gradient is processed on-board using a
Kalman Þlter implemented on the microcontroller, to obtain a
reÞned estimate. The derived optic ßow is next compensated
for image distance (using sonar), and sensor rotation (using
on-board gyroscope) to provide the image velocity.
For our application, PX4Flow sensors are mounted facing
downwards and need to be augmented with a light source
to measure the relative velocity of the surface. As described
in Sec. II, the assembly line operates in only two states and
so the requirement of detecting surface velocity reduces to
that of detecting surface motion. Use of optic ßow for this
purpose requires that the surface to have sufÞcient image
features, and we empirically validate that this is the case
for our particular factory environments. The sensors are
mounted at a Þxed height and maintain a constant distance
from the surface. Hence, the Þxed height of the sensor is
3
http://wiki.ros.org/px4flow_node
4163
used in calculating velocity, rather than the noisy sonar
measurements. This modiÞcation considerably reduces the
noise in the velocity measurement for our application. We
then process the output velocity using a low pass Þlter before
the signal is used in the control algorithm.
The sensors are attached to the robot frame to measure sur-
face velocity relative to the robot at the i
th
wheel (v
optic
i
surf
i
-robot
),
which is then transformed from sensor frame, optic
i
, to
the robot frame, R, to provide v
R
surf
i
-robot
. As the controller
requires absolute (and not relative) surface velocity, we need
additional information about the robotÕs state. Sec. IV-B
provides details of the algorithm used to obtain the robotÕs
absolute velocity, which is then combined with the sensor
measurement to calculate the absolute surface velocity,
v
R
sensor
i
, v
R
surf
i
-robot
= v
R
surf
i
  v
R
robot
(2a)
) v
R
surf
i
= v
R
sensor
i
+ v
R
robot
: (2b)
Sensor Positioning: A suite of four PX4Flow optic ßow
sensors, located at robotÕs corners, is integrated with the
Rob@Work 3 for detecting surface velocity (Fig. 2). As the
robot is omni-directional and can be at an arbitrary relative
orientation with respect to the moving line, we need a sensor
at each of the four wheels. Due to mechanical limitations, the
sensor cannot be placed at the wheelÕs location and thus are
positioned at the vertices of the robotÕs rectangular planform.
Localization information is used to detect when the wheels
are on the assembly line, and the optic ßow sensors are used
to detect the surface motion. This solution ensures detection
of the moving surface for each wheel and arbitrary robot
orientation, since the robot planform is convex in shape.
B. Robot Localization
The robotic platform in its nominal operation uses the
wheel encoders and laser scanner data to obtain its position.
However, when the robot is on a moving surface the encoder
information degrades and cannot be used to reliably estimate
the robotÕs position. Further, when the robot is completely
on the moving surface, the base will move along with the
surface in spite of the wheels being stationary. This causes
inconsistencies between the laser scanner and encoder data,
and results in inaccurate localization using algorithms that
rely on wheel encoders. As a result, there is a need to
estimate the robot state without the use of wheel encoders
once the robot enters a moving surface.
Rather than using wheel encoders, localization can be per-
formed with a suite of 3-axis accelerometers and gyroscopes.
However, performance of inertial sensors degrades with time
and must be corrected with additional input, such as GPS or
vision-based localization. We pursue an approach that uses
the robotÕs existing onboard sensors, and that does not re-
quire external infrastructure (as an indoor positioning system
like solution does). SpeciÞcally we explore the application
of Laser scanner based localization algorithms.
Laser-only based localization: Robot localization using
only laser scanner measurements is a problem that has
been studied in detail [25], [26]. Successful algorithms have
been tested in real systems and have been developed and
implemented. For the mobile robotic assistant, we use a
scan matching approach to localization as described in [26],
primarily because of its open source ROS implementation
4
.
Further, the algorithm requires low computational resources
and is capable of simultaneous localization and mapping.
Implementation of the algorithm on our robotic hardware
results in acceptable localization performance in static envi-
ronments.
Rectifying odometry: Laser scanner-only based localiza-
tion provides absolute robot velocity even when the robot
is on a moving surface. In contrast, the robotÕs motion due
to the moving surface can result in misleading information
from wheel encoders. Equation 3 compensates the velocity
information obtained via wheel encoders; this compensated
velocity can be used as an input for calculating odometry
(e.g. for dead-reckoning), thereby mitigating the error in the
robotÕs odometry on moving surfaces.
v
R
encoder
i
,rectiÞed
= v
R
encoder
i
+ v
R
surf
(3)
The above correction further allows for use of the nominal
localization algorithm when the robot is not on the moving
surface. This is desirable since information from the wheel
encoders is still reliable when the robot is fully on a
stationary surface.
V. EXPERIMENTAL TESTING
We perform initial validation of the controls and sensing
subsystems using both software simulation and hardware
tests. Fig. 3 provides pictures of the two test environments.
Gazebo Simulator: The Gazebo simulator [18] is the
natural choice for software validation in simulation since the
robot uses ROS as its middleware, and Gazebo allows for
testing of the hardware-ready code in simulation. Tests are
conducted in a simulated factory-like environment with a
moving line.
Fig. 3. Test environments for validating the designed control and sensing
sub-systems: the Gazebo software simulation (top) and treadmill-based
hardware test setup (bottom). Ground truth sensor, shown in the right bottom
corner, is mounted on the test setup.
4
http://wiki.ros.org/hector_slam
4164
Customized Treadmill: We use a customized treadmill
5
to
test the system on a real moving surface. The velocity of
the treadmill can be controlled, thereby enabling testing at
different operating conditions.
True Surface Velocity: A wheel-encoder based contact
sensor is used to obtain the ground truth information about
the surface velocity (in this case velocity of the treadmill).
This ground truth sensor is mounted independently of the
robot, and measures the angular displacement of a free
wheel
6
in contact with the treadmill. The angular displace-
ment of the free wheel is measured using a quadrature
encoder, and sufÞcient friction exists between the free wheel
and the treadmill surface to prevent wheel slippage and en-
sure reliable sensing. A software package using the Arduino
micro-controller and ROS interface has been designed to
collect and record information from this sensor.
VI. RESULTS
This section presents the results from simulation and hard-
ware tests using the proposed control and sensing algorithms.
A. Sensing Surface Velocity with Optical Flow
The performance of the PX4Flow sensor is Þrst compared
to the ground truth information, to gauge its accuracy and
inform the requirement of additional processing of the raw
measurements. Experimentation uncovers variation in optic
ßow sensor performance due to lighting conditions. Hence,
the optic ßow sensor is augmented with an additional light
source to ensure its successful operation. Fig. 4 shows the
performance of the optic ßow sensor for a challenging
practical scenario: where the moving surface starts from
rest and then reaches its maximum velocity, and then again
resumes its original rest state.
As can be observed from the Fig. 4, the sensor is capable
of tracking the surface motion albeit with substantial noise.
Further we observe that performance and measurement range
of the optic ßow sensor is dependent on the quality of
image features present on the surface. High levels of noise
5
http://goo.gl/8JGtVQ
6
https://www.sparkfun.com/products/9208
Fig. 4. Performance of the optic ßow sensor as compared to the ground
truth. Both raw measurements from the optic ßow sensor, and its Þltered
value using low pass Þlter are shown.
in surface sensing will produce cascading effects in the
controller performance, and rapidly changing commands will
negatively affect the actuator hardware. This motivates the
design of a discrete time Kalman Þlter with its state as
the surface velocity. The process model accounts for the
variation in the state through a discrete white noise term
with variance s
2
. Process noise is characterized based on
the variation in the surface speed during its on state, which
for our application is approximated as 3s = 1 cm/s. The
measurement noise is also assumed to be white for Þlter
design, and its standard deviation is approximated as 3 cm/s,
based on the in-house tests. A Kalman Þlter with steady-state
gains is used rather than one with time varying gains. This
is equivalent to a low pass Þlter with gains set to the steady-
state gains of the Kalman Þlter.
B. Gazebo simulation
To validate the modiÞcations to the control algorithm prior
to its implementation on the robot hardware, we Þrst use the
test environment developed in the Gazebo simulator (Sec. V).
To validate the controller independently of the sensing, the
Gazebo simulation assumes perfect sensing of the surface
velocity. The robotÕs task is to navigate across the moving
assembly line. An off-the-shelf path planner [21] is used to
plan the robotÕs path. Fig. 5 shows the deviation of robotÕs
center from the desired path. Using the modiÞed system,
the maximum deviation is observed to be <4cm for this
task when the moving surface is operating at 10cm/s (a
representative value for automotive assembly lines). For the
same task, Fig. 6 shows the comparative performance of the
nominal and modiÞed system. In the case of nominal system,
no information regarding the surface state is used resulting
in signiÞcant deviation from the desired path and inaccurate
localization. On the other hand, using the modiÞed system
the robot can successfully navigate across the assembly
line dynamically compensating for the surface velocity and
correcting its heading.
Fig. 5. Performance of the modiÞed system for the task of robot traversing
the moving surface from a typical Gazebo simulation run. MagniÞed
view shows the deviation in the path as the robot enters the moving
surface. However, this deviation is <4cm for the entire path, validating
the modiÞcation in control sub-system.
4165
Fig. 6. Four stills from the simulated performance of the modiÞed control architecture (below) compared with the nominal architecture (top), while the
robot traverses the moving surface. The red arrow indicates the desired robot path. The robot tries to move across the moving surface, but can do so
successfully only with the modiÞed system (as seen in the bottom Þgures). For complete simulation run see the accompanying video.
C. Initial Hardware Validation
After independent validation of the controller (through
Gazebo simulation) and optic ßow sensor (via comparison
with the ground truth), we proceed towards observing the
performance of the combined system. As an initial step,
the sensor for surface velocity is mounted off-board and
performance of the system for the Ôposition holdÕ task is
observed. Position hold is an important task for a robotic as-
sistant, especially while delivering parts to a human associate
working on a moving line.
Fig. 7 shows the two test scenarios for the position hold
experiment, namely, when the robot is completely on, and
when it straddles the moving surface. For these tests, the
customized treadmill operates at 20cm/s during its on
state. For both the cases, the robot successfully maintains
a constant position despite the change in the assembly
lineÕs on/off state. In these tests, the laser scanner based
localization is used to detect when the wheels are on the
customized treadmill and the surface velocity is obtained
using the ground truth sensor; for surfaces with sufÞcient
image features off-board optic ßow sensors also yield similar
performance. Next, the robotÕs ability to navigate across the
moving assembly line is tested in the same test environ-
ment. Similar to Gazebo simulation, the robot successfully
traverses the moving surface (see accompanying video at
http://tiny.cc/aogo3w).
Fig. 7. Position hold experiments with off-board surface sensing being
conducted in two cases: the robot being completely on (left), and straddling
(right) the moving surface.
D. Limitations
In our problem description the assembly lines operate
in two states (on/off), with the on state exhibiting uniform
speed (<20 cm/s). Hence, our validation in simulation and
hardware has been carried out for such a moving surface.
The proposed solution in principle can be applied for moving
surfaces with variable speed; however the performance will
be limited by that of the optic ßow sensors, which is
dependent on the image features of the moving surface and
measurement range. Further, for safety considerations it is
desirable to introduce redundancy for the optic ßow sensors.
We are currently exploring additional measures to improve
the reliability of surface sensing using position and velocity
information obtained from laser scanner-based localization
and encoder information.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Introducing a mobile robotic assistant to perform Ònon-
value added workÓ in assembly lines can yield signiÞcant
improvements in productivity. However, prior to accomplish-
ing any task on the assembly line, the robot Þrst needs to
be able to traverse the moving ßoor present in assembly
lines. In this paper we present a control and sensing solution
for a mobile robotic assistant as it traverses a moving-
ßoor assembly line. Information about surface velocity is
essential for our modiÞed control algorithm. Further, an
alternate method is required for localization since encoder
information degrades when the robot is navigating on moving
surfaces. Off-the-shelf sensors and localization algorithms
are explored for fulÞlling this requirement, and a customized
solution is presented using PX4Flow optic ßow sensors and
a laser scanner-based localization algorithm.
We perform initial validation of the controls and sensing
subsystems using both software simulation and hardware
tests. Software simulation and initial demonstrations of the
full hardware system yield promising results; using off-board
surface sensing the robot successfully moves across and
maintains its position while on, and while straddling, the
moving line. These initial demonstrations are currently being
4166
followed up with tests of the system with on-board sensing
of surface motion.
The solution to the problem of traversing assembly lines
is but a Þrst step towards the deployment of mobile robotic
assistants on the factory ßoor. To provide beneÞt, the
robotic assistant requires path planning, deliberative task
planning/scheduling, and human interface capabilities, en-
suring delivery of the right materials to the point-of-use
at the right time. Various challenges, in both research and
implementation, need to be addressed.
In the current setup, we demonstrated operation of the
robot on a moving surface but in an otherwise static, known
environment. In a real factory setting, the environment
will be dynamic with part carts and humans moving in a
very dense and cluttered space. Additional capabilities are
necessary to detect and avoid humans and other obstacles,
and to ensure efÞcient robot navigation. Conventional path
planning algorithms are reactive, relying primarily on current
knowledge of obstacles in the map, to decide a future path
for the robot. In dynamic environments, these algorithms
often yield trajectories which are highly suboptimal and often
require the robot to stop unnecessarily [27]. We anticipate
the current application will require path planning approaches
for dynamic environments that anticipate the trajectories and
goals of obstacles [28]Ð[30]. Lastly, the robot will not only
need to infer the intent of the human associates, but also
have the ability to communicate its intent for a fruitful
collaboration.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Ron Wiken for help with the construc-
tion of customized treadmill for emulating the assembly line.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Bostelman and W. Shackleford, ÒImproved performance of an
automated guided vehicle by using a smart diagnostics tool,Ó in IEEE
International Conference on Industrial Technology (ICIT), pp. 1688Ð
1693, 2010.
[2] E. Guizzo, ÒThree engineers, hundreds of robots, one warehouse,Ó
IEEE Spectrum, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 26Ð34, 2008.
[3] ÒSafety of human-robot systems in Þxed workcell
environments.Ó http://www.nist.gov/el/isd/ps/
safhumrobsysfixedworkcellenvir.cfm. [Online; last
accessed 1-Sept-2013].
[4] ÒBaxter: manufacturing robot.Ó http://www.
rethinkrobotics.com/products/baxter/. [Online;
last accessed 1-Sept-2013].
[5] ÒKUKA robots.Ó http://www.kuka-robotics.com/usa/
en/pressevents/news/NN_051017_01_Teamworking.
htm. [Online; last accessed 1-Sept-2013].
[6] M. Treat, S. Amory, P. Downey, and D. Taliaferro, ÒInitial clinical
experience with a partly autonomous robotic surgical instrument
server,Ó Surgical Endoscopy And Other Interventional Techniques,
vol. 20, no. 8, pp. 1310Ð1314, 2006.
[7] ÒVECNA hospital delivery robots.Ó http://www.vecna.com/
solutions/hospital-delivery. [Online; last accessed 1-
Sept-2013].
[8] J. Pineau, M. Montemerlo, M. Pollack, N. Roy, and S. Thrun,
ÒTowards robotic assistants in nursing homes: Challenges and results,Ó
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 271Ð281, 2003.
[9] I. R. Nourbakhsh, C. Kunz, and T. Willeke, ÒThe mobot museum robot
installations: A Þve year experiment,Ó in International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), vol. 4, pp. 3636Ð3641, 2003.
[10] W. Burgard, A. B. Cremers, D. Fox, D. H¬ ahnel, G. Lakemeyer,
D. Schulz, W. Steiner, and S. Thrun, ÒExperiences with an interactive
museum tour-guide robot,Ó ArtiÞcial Intelligence, vol. 114, no. 12,
pp. 3 Ð 55, 1999.
[11] T. Kanda, M. Shiomi, Z. Miyashita, H. Ishiguro, and N. Hagita,
ÒA communication robot in a shopping mall,Ó IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 897Ð913, 2010.
[12] B. Graf, U. Reiser, M. Hagele, K. Mauz, and P. Klein, ÒRobotic home
assistant Care-O-bot R  3-product vision and innovation platform,Ó in
IEEE Workshop on Advanced Robotics and its Social Impacts (ARSO),
pp. 139Ð144, 2009.
[13] S. S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, C. J. Helfrich, D. Berenson, A. Collet,
R. Diankov, G. Gallagher, G. Hollinger, J. Kuffner, and M. V . Weghe,
ÒHERB: a home exploring robotic butler,Ó Autonomous Robots,
vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 5Ð20, 2010.
[14] J. C. Boerkoel Jr and J. A. Shah, ÒPlanning for ßexible human-robot
co-navigation in dynamic manufacturing environments,Ó in Interna-
tional Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Proceedings of
Human Robot Interaction Pioneers, 2013.
[15] V . V . Unhelkar, H. C. Siu, and J. A. Shah, ÒComparative performance
of human and mobile robotic assistants in collaborative fetch-and-
deliver tasks,Ó in International Conference on Human-Robot Interac-
tion (HRI), 2014.
[16] ÒRob@Work 3-6.Ó http://www.care-o-bot-research.
org/robatwork-3. [Online; last accessed 1-June-2013].
[17] ÒRobot Operating System.Ó http://wiki.ros.org. [Online; last
accessed 1-June-2013].
[18] ÒGazebo Simulator.Ó http://gazebosim.org/. [Online; last
accessed 1-June-2013].
[19] D. Fox, W. Burgard, F. Dellaert, and S. Thrun, ÒMonte carlo lo-
calization: EfÞcient position estimation for mobile robots,Ó National
Conference on ArtiÞcial Intelligence (AAAI), vol. 1999, pp. 343Ð349,
1999.
[20] G. Grisetti, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard, ÒImproved techniques for
grid mapping with rao-blackwellized particle Þlters,Ó IEEE Transac-
tions on Robotics, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 34Ð46, 2007.
[21] D. Fox, W. Burgard, and S. Thrun, ÒThe dynamic window approach to
collision avoidance,Ó IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 4,
no. 1, pp. 23Ð33, 1997.
[22] D. Honegger, L. Meier, P. Tanskanen, and M. Pollefeys, ÒAn open
source and open hardware embedded metric optical ßow CMOS cam-
era for indoor and outdoor applications,Ó in International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2013.
[23] C. Connette, A. Pott, M. Hagele, and A. Verl, ÒControl of an
pseudo-omnidirectional, non-holonomic, mobile robot based on an
ICM representation in spherical coordinates,Ó in 47th IEEE Conference
on Decision and Control, CDC 2008, pp. 4976Ð4983, Dec 2008.
[24] ÒInnoSenT miniature radars.Ó http://www.innosent.de/en/
industry/isys-systems. [Online; last accessed 1-June-2013].
[25] I. Baldwin and P. Newman, ÒLaser-only road-vehicle localization with
dual 2d push-broom lidars and 3d priors,Ó in International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2490Ð2497, 2012.
[26] S. Kohlbrecher, J. Meyer, O. von Stryk, and U. Klingauf, ÒA ßexible
and scalable SLAM system with full 3d motion estimation,Ó 2011.
[27] P. Trautman and A. Krause, ÒUnfreezing the robot: Navigation in
dense, interacting crowds,Ó in International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 797Ð803, 2010.
[28] S. Thompson, T. Horiuchi, and S. Kagami, ÒA probabilistic model
of human motion and navigation intent for mobile robot path plan-
ning,Ó in International Conference on Autonomous Robots and Agents
(ICARA), pp. 663Ð668, 2009.
[29] B. D. Ziebart, N. Ratliff, G. Gallagher, C. Mertz, K. Peterson, J. A.
Bagnell, M. Hebert, A. K. Dey, and S. Srinivasa, ÒPlanning-based
prediction for pedestrians,Ó in International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 3931Ð3936, 2009.
[30] P. Trautman, ÒProbabilistic tools for human-robot cooperation,Ó in
International Conference on Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), Human
Agent Robot Teamwork Workshop, 2012.
4167
