  
? 
Abstract—The design and control of quadruped robots has 
become a fascinating research field because they have better 
mobility on unstructured terrains. Until now, many kinds of 
quadruped robots were developed, such as JROB-1 [1], BISAM 
[2], BigDog [3], LittleDog [4], HyQ [5] and Cheetah cub [6]. 
They have shown significant walking performance. However, 
most of them use serial mechanism legs and have animal like 
structure: the thigh and the crus. To swing the crus in swing 
phase and support the body’s weight in stance phase, a linear 
actuator is attached on the thigh [2, 3, 5, 6], or instead, a 
rotational actuator is installed on the knee joint [1, 4]. To make 
the robot more useful in the wild environment, e.g., the detection 
or manipulation tasks, the payload capability is very important. 
To carry the sensors or tools, heavy load legged robot is very 
necessary. Thus the knee actuator should be lightweight, 
powerful and easy to maintain. However, this can be very costly 
and hard to satisfy at the same time. 
This video introduces our lately developed quadruped robot. 
It is named as “Baby Elephant” because of the heavy load 
capability and the elephant like appearance. The leg is a 
serial-parallel hybrid mechanism that is one novelty of our 
robot. On the sagittal plane, it is a parallel mechanism consisting 
of two symmetrical crossed limbs. Each leg has three active 
DOFs, driven by three hydraulic actuators mounted on the hip. 
To guarantee the sufficient workspace of the leg (i.e., the spatial 
range that the foot tip can reach) during the walking, the leg 
structure parameters are optimized. Springs are attached to the 
legs to reduce the impact and save energy. Using the pressure 
sensors on hydraulic actuators, it is possible to estimate the 
ground forces without extra foot force sensors. Comparing with 
its serial mechanism counterpart, this leg has neither actuator 
nor sensor on the lower part of the leg. Thus the leg’s inertia 
becomes lower. Moreover, it is easy to protect electronic devices 
when the robot is walking on marshy terrains. Two hip 
actuators on the sagittal plane support the body’s weight 
together, and thus the load capability is also increased. 
A type of hydraulic actuator named the “Hy-Mo” was 
developed that is another novelty of our robot. Its principle is 
that the hydraulic cylinder’s motion is controlled by the motor 
while its power is supplied by hydraulic system. The servo 
motor controls the valve opening, which is proportional to the 
piston displacement via an inner mechanical feedback. The 
advantage is that it does not need servo valve, cooler, filter and 
accumulator. It will result in a more simplified structure, better 
heat dissipation, and lower leakage. 
 Currently, two control schemes are employed. When the 
robot is in a static walking gait, a ZMP-based online planning 
algorithm [7] is employed to generate the trajectory of the 
body’s COG. The ZMP is guaranteed to be located inside the 
support polygon. The ground reaction force (GRF) is estimated 
from the driving force of the actuators using a force estimation 
model. The ZMP can be calculated from the GRFs. Meanwhile, 
an inverse kinetic solver coordinates each leg and controls the 
 
F. Gao, C. Qi, Q. Sun, X. Chen and X. Tian are with the School of 
Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. 
fengg@sjtu.edu.cn 
body’s orientation. When the robot is in a trotting gait, the ZMP 
planning is no longer usable. We developed another trajectory 
planning algorithm to generate trajectories of the feet according 
to a gait pattern that has been verified in the simulation 
environment. 
 The trot experiments were carried out. The “Baby Elephant” 
was equipped with a Li-ion battery to supply the power. The 
self-weight of robot was about 130kg and the extra load was 
30kg. The maximum speed is 1.8 km/h. The static gait 
experiment with the same load was also conducted, which shows 
that the Baby Elephant can walk on different kinds of terrains. 
The maximum load can be up to 100kg. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work is partially supported by the National Basic 
Research Program of China (Grant No. 2013CB035501), 
National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 
51175323), Research Fund of State Key Lab of MSV of 
China (Grant No. MSV201208). 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Kagami, M. Kabasawa, K. Okada, T. Matsuki, Y. Matsumoto, A. 
Konno, M. Inaba, H. Inoue, “Design and development of a legged robot 
research platform JROB-1,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Robotics and Automation, 1998, vol. 1, pp. 146-151. 
[2] K. Berns, W. Ilg, M. Deck, J. Albiez, and R. Dillmann, “Mechanical 
construction and computer architecture of the four-legged walking 
machine BISAM,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 4, 
no. 1, pp. 32-38, 1999. 
[3] M. Raibert, K. Blankespoor, G. Nelson, R. Playter, “BigDog, the 
Rough-Terrain Quadruped Robot,” In Proceedings of the 17th World 
Congress, 2008, vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 10822-10825. 
[4] M. Kalakrishnan, J. Buchli, P. Pastor, M. Mistry, and S. Schaal, “Fast, 
Robust Quadruped Locomotion over Challenging Terrain,” in 
Proceedings of the IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2010, 
pp. 2665 – 2670. 
[5] C. Semini, N. G. Tsagarakis, E. Guglielmino, M. Focchi, F. Cannella, 
and D. G. Caldwell. “Design of HyQ–a hydraulically and electrically 
actuated quadruped robot,” Proceedings of the Institution of 
Mechanical Engineers, Part I: Journal of Systems and Control 
Engineering, vol. 225, no. 6, pp. 831-849, 2011. 
[6]  A. Sprö witz, A. Tuleu, M. Vespignani, M. Ajallooeian, E. Badri and A. 
J. Ijspeert, “Towards dynamic trot gait locomotion: Design, control, 
and experiments with Cheetah-cub, a compliant quadruped robot,” The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 8, pp. 932-950, 
2013. 
[7] S. Kajita, F. Kanehiro, K. Kaneko, K. Fujiware, K. Harada, K. Yokoi, 
and H. Hirukawa. “Biped walking pattern generation by using preview 
control of zero-moment point,” Proceedings of the IEEE Int. Conf. on 
Robotics and Automation, 2003, pp. 1620 – 1626. 
A quadruped robot with parallel mechanism legs 
Feng Gao, Chenkun Qi, Qiao Sun, Xianbao Chen and Xinghua Tian 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2566
