3D Printing with Flying Robots
Graham Hunt, Faidon Mitzalis, Talib Alhinai, Paul A Hooper, Mirko Kovaˇ c
1
Abstract— Extensive work has been devoted recently to the
development of 3D printing or additive layer manufacturing
technologies, as well as to the ﬁeld of ﬂying robots. However,
to the best of the authors
0
knowledge, no robotic prototype has
been presented so far that combines additive layer manufactur-
ing techniques with aerial robotics. In this paper, we examine
the feasibility of such a hybrid approach and present the design
and characterisation of an aerial 3D printer; a ﬂying robot
capable of depositing polyurethane expanding foam in mid-
ﬂight. We evaluate various printing materials and describe the
design and integration of a lightweight printing module onto a
quadcopter, as well as discuss the limitations and opportunities
for aerial construction with ﬂying robots using the developed
technologies. Potential applications include ad-hoc construction
of ﬁrst response structures in search and rescue scenarios,
printing structures to bridge gaps in discontinuous terrain, and
repairing damaged surfaces in areas that are inaccessible by
ground-based robots.

I. INTRODUCTION
3D printing or additive manufacturing has seen great
development in recent years and has become an established
method of manufacturing with many applications. However,
3D printing typically requires a ﬁxed size printer with a
limited printing envelope. The size of the parts produced
are therefore limited by the size of the printer itself and in
most cases scaling up the printer is impractical and costly.
This paper examines the feasibility of an aerial 3D printing
robot (shown in Figure 1) that overcomes restrictions in the
size of the printed structure and allows a signiﬁcant amount
of ﬂexibility in printing location. The material deposition
is performed by a quadcopter carrying an on-board printing
system and depositing material whilst in motion. This allows
it to print three dimensional structures in areas normally
inaccessible by ground or climbing robots with a variety of
maintenance and repair applications.
The use of mobile robots that deposit material is a new
area of research and, to the best of our knowledge, a ﬂying
3D printing robot has not been presented so far. However,
extensive research has been carried out on the two parts of
the system individually, mobile airborne robots and material
deposition systems for 3D printers.
One approach of additive manufacturing techniques best
suited for the needs of the project is fused deposition
modelling (FDM) [1]. FDM uses extruded thermoplastic
or wax from a heatable extrusion head to trace out the
solid areas of the physical models. The extrusion head can
move on the horizontal plane depositing very thin beads of
molten material on a heated platform. Vertical motion of
*See video attachment
This work was done at the Aerial Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
1
Corresponding author: m.kovac@imperial.ac.uk
Fig. 1. Aerial 3D printer, quadcopter with integrated printing module in
orientation ready for printing
the platform allows subsequent layers to be printed using
the same procedure [2]. Unlike other methods, such as
stereolithography or selective laser sintering, FDM does not
require a pool of material and is therefore more suitable for
unrestricted deposition in three-dimensional space.
MA Vs (Micro Air Vehicle), such as quadcopters, allow
for accurate positioning and ﬂexibility of motion in all
three directions to facilitate material deposition. The current
state in mobility and control of quadcopters shows that
advanced ﬂight and control has been achieved [3]–[7], and
the navigation and localisation can be achieved with current
technology [8]–[11].
In the pursuit of large scale automated construction, a
promising example of an alternative 3D printer has been
developed by [12], where one of the solutions involved
depositing concrete using a gantry robot. A second approach
to create mobile construction robots is a swarm of remote
controlled ground vehicle developed by [13, 14], able to
construct a ramp using various amorphous materials. Other
examples of robotic fabrication using amorphous materials
includes the use of thermoplastic adhesives to build robotic
building tools [15] and spider inspired drag lines [16]. Fur-
ther examples of automated construction involved assembling
prefabricated components using quadcopters [17, 18].
In comparison to existing systems, the solution we pro-
pose combines a trajectory guided quadcopter with an on-
board printing system to simulate the printing head of a
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4493
conventional 3D printer. The quadcopter allows ﬂexibility
in positioning of the printing nozzle in all three dimensions.
A material of high viscosity is required for deposition in
order to retain the shape followed by the moving robot.
The geometry of the printed structure can be altered by
controlling the path and dynamics of the robot and an
advantage of an aerial robot, in contrast to a ground system,
is that it can reach high elevations easily and build 3D
structures in inaccessible or hazardous areas.
II. PRINTING MATERIAL
A promising printing method to integrate on a ﬂying plat-
form is a system that resembles Fused Deposition Modelling
techniques that are used in conventional 3D printers. The
material is deposited in a very viscous liquid form and cures
upon extrusion from the printing nozzle. Using this technique
the printed geometry depends on the path followed by the
printing nozzle. Hence the robot itself, and the ﬂow rate
of the material can control the printed geometry. A major
challenge is to choose a suitable material for successful
integration on the ﬂying robot.
A. Material Selection
The feasibility of a controllable, lightweight printing sys-
tem largely depends on the material used for printing and the
main properties that were considered in selection are listed
below.
1) Density of the printing material
2) Curing time
3) Material strength after solidiﬁcation
4) Expansion of the material after curing
5) Cost
Based on a comparison (Table I) we concluded that two
part polyurethane (PU) foam is the best solution, provid-
ing a large volume expansion in a short time scale. PU
foam consists of two components, component one contains
polyetherols, ﬂame-retardant, silicone, catalyst and blow-
ing agents (Chemical A) and the second component is
a diisocyanato diphenylmethane (MDI) based composition
(Chemical B). The main advantage of two part polyurethane
expanding foam is the very large expansion during solidi-
ﬁcation, approximately 25 times its initial volume. In this
way a small volume of material can be carried on the
ﬂying platform, expanding to a considerably larger volume
of printed structure after deposition. Additionally, using two
part liquid solutions, the two chemicals are stored separately
which ensures that the material is in a non-reacting state be-
fore the printing process is initiated. Furthermore, a reﬁlling
system can potentially be achieved by pumping liquid inside
the two containers, a process which could be performed
autonomously by the robot. The material is also self-adhesive
and can be applied to a wide variety of surfaces. A signiﬁcant
challenge using the two part polyurethane foam is achieving
high quality mixing and a high viscosity solution on-board
the robot with a lightweight printing system.
B. Material Testing
We performed preliminary testing of the material to deter-
mine the design requirements of the printing system for high
quality printing. The main parameter was the time required
for the two liquids to react and start producing foam.
A static mixing nozzle was used to mix the two chemicals.
In the ﬁrst tests, the two chemicals were well mixed when
leaving the nozzle but the mixture was still in liquid form
when it was deposited. A more viscous, foam form was
required for printing to avoid the material spreading on the
surface, producing undesirable results. The module design
was altered to introduce a reaction chamber after the mixing
nozzle, where the two chemicals are held until they fully
react and produce foam. Material deposition starts after the
foam starts forming, when the material is in a very viscous
state allowing for the shape to be maintained after printing.
To determine the required reaction time we deposited foam
samples with a time of 45s, 60s, 75s and 90s on a 30

inclined slope and its shape changed until full hardening
(Figure 2).
Fig. 2. Examples (a) to (d) show a foam deposit after increasing reaction
time. The viscosity after a reaction time of 45s is too inviscid for deposition.
The limiting time was observed to be 90s, before the foam hardened too
much for deposition (a): 45s (b): 60s (c): 75s (d): 90s Grid spacing: 10mm
III. DESIGN
The design method followed was to divide the system into
the printing module and the mobility platform. The printing
module delivers the material in a highly viscous form and
deposits the material at the position of the printing nozzle.
Using the quadcopter platform the robot can move to the
required location and follow the path required to form the
intended geometry by depositing material along its way.
A. Printing System
From the materials considered, two part polyurethane
expanding foam was chosen as the most appropriate material
for the application. The processes required by the printing
system for polyurethane foam are, storing the two chemicals
4494
TABLE I
MATERIAL COMPARISON
Material
Density kg=m
3
(after expansion)
Expansion Curing Time Heating Required?
Single Part Polyurethane
Foam
3 24 times 4 hours No
Two Part Polyurethane
Foam
48-50 25 times 15 mins No
Thermoplastics (ABS) 1,042 1 times 5 s Yes
Two Part Epoxy Adhesive 250 1 times 24 hours No
Hot Glue 960 1 times 1 min Yes
in separate containers, delivering and mixing the chemicals
on-board the quadcopter, and ﬁnally depositing the material
through a printing nozzle. The process and timings are
summarised in Figure 3.
Fig. 3. Schematic showing order and allocated times (in red) of each
process which occurs within the printing nozzle. The printing operation
requires 103 seconds to complete.
A major design criterion of the printing system was the
mass of the system. To achieve continuous steady ﬂight, the
maximum payload of the quadcopter is approximately 500g.
Additionally, ease of manufacture was a key aspect in the
design as many parts of the system had to be replaceable to
avoid clogging, especially in places where the mixture could
potentially solidify prior to deposition. The main design
criteria are summarised in Table II, focusing on low cost,
robustness and low weight.
TABLE II
DESIGN CRITERIA FOR PRINTING SYSTEM
Criterion Aim Importance (1 to 5)
Total Mass <130 grams 5
Cost of Materials
Less than £5
(excluding actuators)
2
Ease of Manufacture Use standard parts 4
Compact Fit on quadcopter base 5
High Toughness Limit damage upon impact 2
The assembly of all the components of the printing system
is shown in Figure 4. The major component assemblies
within the module are discussed individually in the following
sections.
Fig. 4. Complete printing module with a CAD breakdown of components.
a: Printing module b(1): Micro geared motor b(2): M2 Lead screw c(1):
Buffer chamber for chemical reaction process c(2): Customized chemical
mixing junction, c(3): Mixing nozzle, c(4):Printing Nozzle
1) Delivery System: The two chemicals are stored in
two separate containers. The containers used are two 5mL
syringes which can also be used to pump the liquid out using
the plunger. Manufacturing modiﬁcations have to be made to
the syringes used in the system in order to reduce weight.
The conﬁguration of the delivery actuator is shown in Figure
5.
Fig. 5. CAD render cross-section of delivery actuator for mixing chemicals
A and B. A lead screw design is utilised to provide linear actuation of the
two storage container plungers.
Essential for accomplishing good mixing quality is to
ensure that the ﬂows of Chemical A and Chemical B are
equal, as a consistent 1:1 mixing ratio is required. To achieve
this a lead screw design was utilised to provide the linear
4495
TABLE III
WEIGHT BUDGET
Part Weight (g) Manufacturing
Delivery Module
Micro geared motor 10 Commercial Component
M2 Lead screw 2 Commercial Component
Miniature bearings (2x) 1 Commercial Components
Housing 11 3D Printed PLA
Component Syringe (2x) 5 Commercial Component
Lead screw attachment 2 3D Printed PLA
Disposable Components
Mixing Nozzle 3 Commercial Component
Mixing Junction 3 3D Printed PLA
Foam Junction 5 3D Printed PLA
Reaction Chamber 4 Commercial Component
Printing Nozzle 1 3D Printed PLA
Other
Mounting rig and electronic
components
157 -
Miscellaneous (Rubber tubing,
thread, wiring)
28 -
Total 232 -
force to move the syringe plungers. The screw is driven by
a motor and the power required for this motor is matched
to the force required to move both container syringes. The
two 5ml syringes are placed parallel and inline with the lead
screw and the force is applied to both plungers equally. This
is a powerful lightweight solution that ensures that the ﬂows
of the two chemicals are equal. The mass associated with
each component is listed in Table III. This shows there is
an additional 250g of capacity for increasing the chemical
payload, from the current 5ml of each component ( 10g),
with minor adjustments to the structural design.
2) Mixing Components: The two chemicals are mixed
by joining the ﬂows with a custom design Y-splitter and
pumping them through a disposable mixing nozzle (Figure
6). The mixing nozzle is a static mixer, whose internal
geometry enhances mixing of the two chemicals. At the exit
of the mixing nozzle the two chemicals are fully mixed.
Testing showed that mixing of the two chemicals using
the static mixer is satisfactory. However, the mixture is still
in liquid form and not viscous enough for deposition. In that
form the printing material would spread on the surface it
is deposited on. To overcome this problem and produce the
foam prior to deposition, more time is needed for the two
chemicals to react.
3) Reaction Chamber: In order to provide more time for
the two chemicals to react, the mixture is held in a reaction
chamber until the mixture starts taking the required form.
Material testing showed that approximately 90 seconds after
the ﬂow initiates the mixture is of an adequate viscosity for
deposition. Until that time the mixture is held in the reaction
chamber.
The reaction chamber is constructed from a 10 mL syringe,
one side has two lines connected the inﬂow and outﬂow
of the mixture. The other side is used to pressurise the
syringe using an air pump. When foam starts forming and
the material is ready for deposition, air is pressurised in the
syringe so the material is pushed through the outﬂow to the
Fig. 6. Reaction Chamber plus the foam junction which leads to the
printing nozzle. The foam junction also has an intake port through which
mixed components are delivered from the mixing nozzle
printing nozzle. The reaction chamber is shown in Figure 6.
4) Nozzle Valve: A single valve is required on the printing
nozzle to prevent outﬂow of the chemical mixture prior to
complete mixing and reaction. Due to weight restrictions
pinch valves, which would be suitable for the application,
could not be used. Hence, we designed a custom valve
system to block and release the ﬂow. The valve system uses a
servo to pull and bend the silicon tubing to block the ﬂow of
air and foam by forming a seal against the printing module
support.
5) Printing Nozzle: The last component of the printing
system is the printing nozzle. Various shapes can be used for
the printing nozzle depending on the required shape of the
foam. We designed a simple nozzle that ensures the material
is deposited in a laminar fashion in order to optimise the
accuracy of the ﬁnal release of foam.
B. Aerial Platform
The printing system has been designed to be attached to
the 3DR ArduCopter Quad. The quadcopter has an on-board
processor (ArduPilot), three axes accelerometer, three axes
magnetometers and speed controllers on all four brushless
motors. For accurate localisation in the ﬂight arena, we use
a 3D motion tracking system with 16 Vicon T40 cameras
[19]. A separate off-board controller uses the tracking coor-
dinates from the Vicon system and transmits commands at a
frequency of 50Hz to the on-board processor to control its
position.
The ﬂight stability and accuracy required is a major chal-
lenge, however the focus of this paper is on the automated
foam deposition mechanism and not on the control of the
platform. The underactuated nature of the quadcopter [20],
the signiﬁcant payload from the printing module ( 300g)
and minor imbalances in mass distribution render the system
challenging to control. For ﬂight control, a cascaded PID
controller was used [21] that is speciﬁcally developed for
this platform. Accuracy within 10cm in all three translational
directions was achieved, which was sufﬁcient for successful
printing results. Signiﬁcant improvements in the results are
expected if a more advanced controller is adopted such as
4496
optic ﬂow stability based ﬂight control. Future work will
address the integration of the presented printing module on
a ﬂying robot with on-board ﬂight control and navigation
that would not rely on a motion tracking environment.
Extensive testing of the system showed that the effects
of the downwash and the distance from the ground do not
signiﬁcantly affect the precision of the print. The speed of
deposition suggests that the entirety the print is within a
small region even if the robot is drifting around the target
position while depositing, this is shown in the video attached.
IV. INTEGRATION
The printing module must be integrated into the quad-
copter system in a manner which is robust and does not
compromise the performance of the robot.
A. Mounting
In order to mount the printing module on to the quadcopter
a rig was designed (Figure 7). The rig has two main
functions, ﬁrstly it acts to attach the printing module to the
base of the robot. The rig is designed such that there is
a clearance between the quadcopter’s legs and the base of
the module. This is intended to prevent any damage to the
module during landing or in the event of unexpected failure
during ﬂight.
Secondly the rig also allows for the rotation of the printing
module (Figure 8). This rotation is performed by a servo ac-
tuator ﬁxed onto the mounting rig enabling vertical alignment
during a printing operation. This orientation increases the
robot’s ground clearance during printing, reducing turbulent
ground effects leading to improved deposition accuracy.
Travelling to the print position and landing however is
impractical with the module in this orientation, therefore the
module is rotated to the horizontal, bringing it to a secure
position before and after performing a print.
Fig. 7. CAD Model of printing module attached to mounting rig
B. Dynamic Coupling of the Combined System
The printing module represents a mass at a location
displaced from the quadcopter centre of mass. This produces
Fig. 8. The module is held vertically to perform a print operation and is
held horizontally for travelling and landing
an imbalance in the system which the controller must con-
tinually account for. In addition to this, the movement of
the printing arm from horizontal to vertical position, or vice
versa, upsets the stability of the quadcopter during hover.
The controller responds to this input and the response can be
seen in the supplementary video. To account for this issue,
printing is delayed until the controller has responded and
the quadcopter is stable again within predeﬁned limits. In
the future a more advanced controller could be implemented
to reduce the effect of on-board movements.
V. RESULTS
We demonstrated the feasibility of an aerial 3D printer
by performing airborne depositions using predeﬁned ﬂight
paths tracked via a 3D motion capture system. In this section,
we present the results and performance characterisation of
the printing mechanism and the integrated aerial 3D printer
robot. Further, we describe two printing scenarios and discuss
the opportunities and limitations of the developed aerial 3D
printing technologies for construction with ﬂying robots.
A. Scenario 1: Bridging gaps in terrains
This scenario illustrates gap ﬁlling properties of the 3D
printing method. The experimental setup consists of two
suspended aluminium beams of a width of 25 mm separated
by an air gap of 18mm. This setup abstracts a crack that
needs to be bonded by the 3D printing robot. We performed
ﬁve consecutive static depositions: twice on each aluminium
beam and a ﬁnal ﬁfth print to further reinforce the bridged
gap. The air gap between the beams was bridged after
the second deposition (Figure 9a). Transitioning this to an
airborne solution is now only dependent on the quality of
ﬂight controller.
The two beams were connected by a polyurethane foam
bridge of cross-sectional area 1300 mm
2
. To characterise
the strength of the bridge, we used a multi-axis load cell
to measure the force required for fracture. The maximum
load recorded was 153.9 N, corresponding to a yield stress
4497
Fig. 9. (a1) - (a4) Shows the static deposition of material between an
18mm gap. (a4) shows the gap was successfully bridged; (b1) - (b4) shows
the static deposition on a damaged wooden beam. (b4) shows how after a
single print the damage has begun to be rectiﬁed by the robot; (c1) - (c3)
shows comparison of static and airborne deposition accuracy. (c1) is a result
whilst the robot is grounded, (c2) and (c3) shows a ﬁrst and subsequent
deposition whilst the robot is airborne.
of 118.0 kPa. Assuming that the tensile behaviour scales
linearly, the same depth of foam printed along a metre long
gap of width 18mm, the structure could withstand loading
up to roughly 7.5 kN.
B. Scenario 2: Repairing damaged structures
As a demonstration of repairing damaged structures with
the aerial 3D printing method developed in this paper, the
second scenario consists of a damaged wooden beam and
the foam printing mechanism that is held ﬁxed above it.
This experiment illustrates a potential scenario where a quad-
copter prints foam over a damaged structure in access denied
terrain to repair it. The results (Figure 9b) show that the
foam is successfully used as ﬁlling material for the wooden
beam. After hardening for ﬁve minutes it forms a rigid
closed cell foam structure that adheres solidly to the wooden
beam, indicating that the mechanism design and integration
methods are successful as well as that polyurethane foam
can be used as ﬁlling material for wooden structures. Again,
achieving this result for an airborne deposition in the future
would only be dependent on the establishing the required
ﬂight control.
C. Characterisation of deposition accuracy
Two successful prints are performed on a target (Figure 9c)
and a compared to a print with the suspended mechanism.
The results show that aerial 3D printing is achieved. The
accuracy is shown to be highly dependent on the stability
of the ﬂight and is also affected by the downwash from
the propellers. Printing within a 10cm radius has been
achieved (Figure 9c (2 & 3)) and with increasing ﬂight
stability, the accuracy of a static deposition described in the
aforementioned scenarios can be approached (Figure 9c (1)).
VI. DISCUSSION
Possible related applications of the scenarios presented
involve bridging air gaps to allow for land robots to overcome
difﬁcult terrain or to insulate and hold together overhead
power lines during natural disasters. The range of appli-
cations of such an aerial 3D printer are very rich and
span from local repair of damaged surfaces to construction
of entire three dimensional structures. Combining the pre-
sented mechanism with swarm control and special navigation
schemes, such as simultaneous localisation and mapping
(SLAM), could allow for autonomous detection and repair
using swarms of aerial printers. The main limitations are,
low material capacity due to the relatively small payload
capacity and limited battery life of the quadcopter, as well as
inability to regulate and stop a printing cycle halfway through
to move on and print at another location. Nevertheless, the
current system proposes successful mechanical integration
and methods for aerial printing with polyurethane foam and
demonstrates a future for additive layer manufacturing in
combination with aerial robots.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we presented the design and characterisation
of an aerial 3D printer capable of depositing polyurethane
foam to create structures in mid ﬂight. Through two different
scenarios, we demonstrate the capabilities and potential
applications of this technique. Based on the characterisation
and successful integration of a 3D printing module on a
quadcopter, we conclude that aerial 3D printing is a promis-
ing new addition to the ﬁeld of aerial construction. The
major limitation of this construction technique is the limited
payload of ﬂying robots. Improved ﬂight stability will allow
more accurate deposition to facilitate printing of structures
at tighter tolerances. Future work could therefore focus
on multi-vehicle coordination to enable the construction of
larger structures and automating the raw component reﬁlling
process to shorten intervals between successive prints. Adapt-
ing the system for different materials can further expand the
applications of the system.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge the Department of
Aeronautics at Imperial College London and The Engi-
neering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC)
for their support of this work. Any opinions, ﬁndings, and
conclusions or recommendations in this material are those of
the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the views of the
aforementioned entities. Talib Alhinai thanks the Abu Dhabi
Investment Authority (ADIA) for ﬁnancial support.
4498
REFERENCES
[1] Ian Gibson, David W Rosen, and Brent Stucker. Additive manufac-
turing technologies: rapid prototyping to direct digital manufacturing.
Springer, 2010.
[2] CJ Luis Perez. Analysis of the surface roughness and dimensional
accuracy capability of fused deposition modelling processes. Interna-
tional Journal of Production Research, 40(12):2865–2881, 2002.
[3] Sergei Lupashin, Angela Scholig, Michael Sherback, and Raffaello
D’Andrea. A simple learning strategy for high-speed quadrocopter
multi-ﬂips. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2010, pages 1642–1648.
[4] Aleksandr Kushleyev, Vijay Kumar, and Daniel Mellinger. Towards a
swarm of agile micro quadrotors. In Robotics: Science and Systems,
2012.
[5] Korbinian Schmid, Teodor Tomic, Felix Ruess, Heiko Hirschmuller,
and Michael Suppa. Stereo vision based indoor/outdoor navigation
for ﬂying robots. In IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2013, pages 3955–3962.
[6] Daniel Gurdan, Jan Stumpf, Michael Achtelik, K-M Doth, Gerd
Hirzinger, and Daniela Rus. Energy-efﬁcient autonomous four-rotor
ﬂying robot controlled at 1 khz. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2007, pages 361–366.
[7] Nathan Michael, Daniel Mellinger, Quentin Lindsey, and Vijay Ku-
mar. The grasp multiple micro-uav testbed. Robotics & Automation
Magazine, IEEE, 17(3):56–65, 2010.
[8] Markus Hehn and Raffaello D’Andrea. Quadrocopter trajectory
generation and control. In IFAC World Congress, pages 1485–1491,
2011.
[9] Korbinian Schmid, Michael Suppa, and Darius Burschka. Towards
Autonomous MA V Exploration in Cluttered Indoor and Outdoor
Environments. RSS 2013 Workshop on Resource-Efﬁcient Integration
of Perception, Control and Navigation for Micro Air Vehicles (MAVs),
2013.
[10] Charles Richter, Adam Bry, and Nicholas Roy. Polynomial trajectory
planning for quadrotor ﬂight. In International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, 2013.
[11] Matthew Turpin, Kartik Mohta, Nathan Michael, and Vijay Kumar.
Goal assignment and trajectory planning for large teams of aerial
robots. In Proc. Robotics: Science and Systems, 2013.
[12] Sungwoo Lim, Richard A. Buswell, Thanh T. Le, Simon A. Austin,
Alistair GF Gibb, and Tony Thorpe. Developments in construction-
scale additive manufacturing processes. Automation in Construction,
21:262–268, 2012.
[13] Nils Napp, Olive R. Rappoli, Jessica M. Wu, and Radhika Nagpal.
Materials and mechanisms for amorphous robotic construction. In
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), 2012, pages 4879–4885.
[14] Justin Werfel, Kristin Peterson, and Radhika Nagpal. Designing
collective behavior in a termite-inspired robot construction team.
Science Magazine, 343:754–758, 2014.
[15] Luzius Brodbeck, Liyu Wang, and Fumiya Iida. Robotic body
extension based on hot melt adhesives. In Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on, pages 4322–4327.
IEEE, 2012.
[16] Liyu Wang, Utku Culha, and Fumiya Iida. A dragline-forming
mobile robot inspired by spiders. Bioinspiration and Biomimetics,
9(1):016006, 2014.
[17] Quentin Lindsey, Daniel Mellinger, and Vijay Kumar. Construction of
cubic structures with quadrotor teams. Robotics: Science and Systems,
2011.
[18] Jan Willmann, Federico Augugliaro, Thomas Cadalbert, Raffaello
D’Andrea, Fabio Gramazio, and Matthias Kohler. Aerial robotic con-
struction towards a new ﬁeld of architectural research. International
journal of architectural computing, 10(3):439–460, 2012.
[19] Motion Systems Vicon. Vicon, August 2013.
[20] Inkyu Sa and Peter Corke. System identiﬁcation, estimation and con-
trol for a cost effective open-source quadcopter. In IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2012, pages 2202–
2209.
[21] Adam Braithwaite and Mirko Kovac. An extensible on-board ﬂight
control system for the arducopter platform. In review, 2014.
4499
