Flying Between Obstacles with an Autonomous Knife-Edge Maneuver
Andrew J. Barry
1
, Tim Jenks
1
, Anirudha Majumdar
1
, Huai-Ti Lin
2
, Ivo G. Ros
2
,
Andrew A. Biewener
2
, and Russ Tedrake
1
Avian ﬂight far exceeds our best aircraft control systems.
We have conducted a series of experiments at the Concord
Field Station demonstrating the extraordinary maneuverabil-
ity of the common pigeon, showing it darting through tight
spaces and recovering from large disturbances with ease. Our
goal is to understand how to make small ﬁxed-wing aircraft
achieve similar feats in equally challenging environments.
In the past few years, quadrotor vehicles have succeeded in
demonstrating some of these feats, including ﬂying through
small gaps, cooperative grasping, transport, and formation
ﬂight [6]. Interactions include juggling between themselves
in ﬂight [7], cooperative ball throwing [8], and even aerial
construction [4].
Fixed-wing performance has been more limited. With
longer endurance, ﬁxed wings are often more practical than
quadrotors for ﬁeld operations. They suffer, however, from
substantially less control authority compared to the consid-
erable thrust vectoring capabilities of quadrotor platforms.
Recently, Cory demonstrated a ﬁxed-wing glider perching
on a wire [3]; we apply a similar control design here.
Sobolic developed a system capable of transition from the
hover regime to forward ﬂight [9]. Bry et. al. maneuvered
in tight spaces, but their system was primarily designed
to study sensing and did not attempt aggressive obstacle
avoidance [2]. Mejias et. al. discuss collision avoidance for
aerial tracking, focusing on UA V integration into commercial
airspace [5].
In this experiment, we assume that our system is given full
sensing information about its location and the environment.
The task we execute is a “knife-edge” maneuver, in which a
28-inch wingspan aircraft is launched at 7 meters per second
(16 MPH) and must execute a dramatic roll to navigate
through a gap that is smaller than its wingspan. This task
forces our system to roll 70 degrees in under two body-
lengths while maintaining precise tracking following a 9-G
launch that accelerates the aircraft to 10 body-lengths per
second.
APPROACH
We use a model-based approach with a 12-state model
similar to [9], identiﬁed using airframe measurements and
repeated ﬂights in motion capture. The motion capture data
The authors are with (1) Computer Science and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
Laboratory (CSAIL) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA and (2) Concord Field Station, Harvard University,
Bedford, MA, USA. Work supported by ONR MURI grant N00014-09-1-
1051. fabarry,tjenks,anirudha,russtg@csail.mit.edu,
fhuaiti.lin, ivo.rosg@gmail.com,
abiewener@oeb.harvard.edu
allows us ﬁt parameters such as body drag that would
typically require wind-tunnel testing. Based on that model,
we use a locally optimal direct collocation method for
trajectory optimization with added non-collision constraints.
We stabilize those open-loop plans with a time-varying linear
quadratic regulator (TVLQR) [10].
The system’s tracking is sufﬁcient for repeated ﬂights
through the obstacle ﬁeld without collision. We have suc-
cessfully ﬂown 9 out of 9 ﬂights through vertical obstacles
spaced 27.5 inches apart using two different locally opti-
mal trajectories. More information about our techniques is
detailed in [1].
We have demonstrated a ﬁxed-wing aircraft that success-
fully performs a knife-edge maneuver required to avoid
environmental obstacles, rolling 70 degrees in under two
body-lengths, while moving at over 10 body-lengths per
second. Our system, using an aerodynamic model, direct
collocation based trajectory optimization, and TVLQR is
capable of performing the maneuver robustly. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the tightest wingspan to gap-size
ratio ever navigated with an autonomous ﬁxed-wing aircraft.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Barry. Flying between obstacles with an autonomous knife-edge
maneuver. Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Sep
2012.
[2] A. Bry, A. Bachrach, and N. Roy. State estimation for aggressive
ﬂight in gps-denied environments using onboard sensing. In 2012
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 1–8. IEEE, 2012.
[3] R. Cory and R. Tedrake. Experiments in ﬁxed-wing UA V perching.
In Proceedings of the AIAA Guidance, Navigation, and Control
Conference. AIAA, 2008.
[4] Q. Lindsey, D. Mellinger, and V . Kumar. Construction with quadrotor
teams. Autonomous Robots, 33(3):323–336, 2012.
[5] L. Mejias, S. McNamara, J. Lai, and J. Ford. Vision-based detection
and tracking of aerial targets for uav collision avoidance. In Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, pages 87–92. IEEE, 2010.
[6] D. Mellinger, N. Michael, and V . Kumar. Trajectory generation
and control for precise aggressive maneuvers with quadrotors. In
Proceedings of the 12th International Symposium on Experimental
Robotics (ISER 2010), 2010.
[7] M. Muller, S. Lupashin, and R. D’Andrea. Quadrocopter ball juggling.
In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on, pages 5113–5120. IEEE, 2011.
[8] R. Ritz, M. W. Muller, M. Hehn, and R. D’Andrea. Cooperative
quadrocopter ball throwing and catching. In Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pages
4972–4978. IEEE, 2012.
[9] F. M. Sobolic. Agile ﬂight control techniques for a ﬁxed-wing aircraft.
Master’s thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Department of
Aeronautics and Astronautics, Cambridge MA, June 2009.
[10] R. Tedrake. LQR-Trees: Feedback motion planning on sparse random-
ized trees. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
page 8, 2009.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2559
