  
  
Abstract—Lower-limb wearable robots have been proposed as a 
means to augment or assist the wearer’s natural performance, in 
particular, in the military and medical field. Previous research 
studies on human-robot interaction and biomechanics have 
largely been performed with rigid exoskeletons that add 
significant inertia to the lower extremities and provide 
constraints to the wearer’s natural kinematics in both actuated 
and non-actuated degrees of freedom. Actuated lightweight soft 
exosuits minimize these effects and provide a unique opportunity 
to study human-robot interaction in wearable systems without 
affecting the subjects underlying natural dynamics. In this 
paper, we present the design and control of a reconfigurable 
multi-joint actuation platform that can provide biologically 
realistic torques to ankle, knee, and hip joints through lower 
extremity soft exosuits. Two different soft exosuits have been 
designed to deliver assistive forces through Bowden cable 
transmission to the ankle and hip joints. Through human subject 
experiments, it is demonstrated that with a real-time admittance 
controller, accurate force profile tracking can be achieved 
during walking. The average energy delivered to the test subject 
was calculated while walking at 1.25 m/s and actuated with 15% 
of the total torque required by the biological joints. The results 
show that the ankle joint received an average of 3.02J during 
plantar flexion and that the hip joint received 1.67J during 
flexion each gait cycle. The efficiency of the described suit and 
controller in transferring energy to the human biological joints 
is 70% for the ankle and 48% for the hip. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Research in powered exoskeleton devices with the goal of 
assisting or enhancing human activities, began in the late 
1960s [1]. Over the last two decades, a number of lower 
extremity robotic exoskeletons have been proposed for 
military-targeted power and endurance augmentation [2-4], 
rehabilitation [5-13] and functional replacement [14]. 
These previous exoskeletons typically rely on rigid 
linkages parallel to the biological anatomy. Pads, straps, belts, 
vacuumed sockets or other techniques are used to couple the 
body with the exoskeletons. Due to the rigid linkages, large 
 
*This material is based upon work supported by the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), Warrior Web Program (Contract No. 
W911QX-12-C-0084). The views and conclusions contained in this 
document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as 
representing the official policies, either expressly or implied, of DARPA or 
the U.S.Government. This work was also partially funded by the Wyss 
Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering and the School of Engineering 
and Applied Sciences at Harvard University.  
Y. Ding, I. Galiana, A. Asbeck, S.M.M. De Rossi, C. Walsh are with the 
School of Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, 
Cambridge, MA 02138 USA (phone: 617-496-7128, email: 
walsh@seas.harvard.edu)  
B. Quinlivan is with Franklin W. Olin College of Engineering, Needham, 
MA, 02492 
Corresponding author: C. J. Walsh 
inertia and corresponding joints misalignments, the traditional 
rigid exoskeletons constrain the biological joints of the 
actuated and non-actuated degrees of freedom (DOFs), which 
leads to deviation from the wearer’s natural motion, 
discomfort or injuries [15, 16]. Moreover, an additional 
consequence is that a wearer will typically expend an 
increased amount of energy to complete a desired motion (e.g. 
walking). Although various controllers have been designed to 
provide a more intimate and natural interaction between the 
device and the wearer, these effects still limit the applicability 
of these systems outside of a laboratory environment.   
To address these limitations, there has been a recent push 
to develop next generation wearable robots that use soft 
materials such as textiles and elastomers to provide a more 
conformal, unobtrusive and compliant means to interface to 
the human body [17, 18]. Unlike traditional exoskeletons 
which contain rigid linkage elements, the vision is that these 
systems can be worn like clothing; yet still generate significant 
moments at the leg joints to assist with walking. Compared to 
traditional exoskeletons, the wearer's joints are unconstrained 
by external rigid structures, and the worn part of the suit is 
extremely light, which minimizes the suit's unintentional 
interference with the body's natural biomechanics. 
Early work in soft wearable robots utilized McKibben 
actuators to attach to the soft suit and generate forces across 
the biological joints [17, 19]. The reasons for selecting 
McKibben actuators for these systems are that they are 
compliant, yet can still generate significant forces to mimic 
those from the underlying biological muscles and for early 
prototyping, the power source can be off the wearer and 
connected via a tether. However, a limitation of McKibben 
actuators is that their stroke length is limited, meaning that the 
soft exosuit can pose constraints on the human body. This can 
be a particular challenge when antagonistic actuation is 
Multi-joint Actuation Platform for Lower Extremity Soft Exosuits 
Ye Ding, Ignacio Galiana, Alan Asbeck, Brendan Quinlivan, Stefano Marco Maria De Rossi, Conor 
Walsh, Member, IEEE 
 
Figure 1 Multi-joint actuation platform with ankle and hip soft exosuit 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1327
  
required. In addition to affecting the range of motion, accurate 
position and force control is hard to achieve for this form of 
actuation.  
To alleviate some of these challenges, a system with a 
cable-based actuation system was introduced. Bowden cables 
are used to transmit forces from proximally mounted 
electromechanical actuation units to distal attachment points 
on the soft suit to assist the lower extremities. A torque can be 
applied to the biological joint by attaching the end of the 
Bowden cable sheath and inner cable on either side of it.  
When the Bowden cable is actuated, it brings together these 
attachment points, thus generating a pulling force on the suit 
and a resultant torque at the joint. Since Bowden cables can be 
configured to follow any path, this allows flexibility in the 
placement of the actuator units. For example, they could be 
mounted on a waist belt, backpack or even on a lab bench.  
The combination of a soft textile exosuit and low profile 
remote actuation means that for the first time torques can be 
applied to the lower extremities without adversely affecting 
the natural dynamics and degrees of freedom of walking. 
While, there has been much exciting prototype development 
in the area of wearable robotics, many basic scientific research 
questions remain to understand the required characteristics of 
the assistive torques to be applied the user in order to improve 
locomotor performance. These systems need to be highly 
intuitive to the wearer, provide assistance when required while 
providing minimal to no disruption the rest of the time so as to 
not interfere with the human natural gait and biomechanics. In 
particular, they should sync synergistically with the user so 
that natural movement and stable control can be achieved 
while inputting minimal actuator energy.   
To explore these human-robot interaction research 
questions in an efficient and controlled manner, we present a 
laboratory-based reconfigurable off-board multi-joint 
actuation platform that can be connected to lower extremity 
soft exosuits as shown in Figure 1. With this platform, the 
weight of the actuation system does not affect our exploration 
of the optimal means to apply assistance. The control 
strategies developed on this platform will be used in our future 
fully-mobile systems. This platform consists of six linear 
actuators connected to Bowden cables which are designed to 
provide biologically realistic torques either separately or 
simultaneously at the ankle, knee and hip joints during normal 
walking. Since our goal is to provide torques in parallel to 
muscle groups as opposed to controlling the position of the 
joint, our systems don’t necessary require two actuators for 
each joint. In this paper, two different exosuits are presented 
actuating ankle plantar flexion and hip flexion/extension 
respectively. Using a real-time control architecture, it is 
demonstrated that accurate assistive forces can be delivered to 
the human joints through soft exosuits with an admittance 
controller. The actuation platform has integrated sensors that 
monitor voltage, current, force and position at the 
actuator-side and a force sensor in the exosuit to monitor local 
forces so that electrical and mechanical energy calculations 
can be performed. This allows the calculation of the actuation 
efficiency, the amount of power delivered by the actuators to 
the suit and the efficiency of the suit in transmitting power to 
the biological joints. Experimental walking test results on 
human subjects show that the proposed system can deliver 
accurate forces to multiple joints through soft exosuits.  
II. SOFT EXOSUIT FOR GAIT ASSISTANCE 
The soft exosuits discussed in this paper were designed to 
provide appropriate assistance to the lower extremity joints 
through a comfortable user interface, improving the wearer’s 
walking efficiency and reducing the muscular effort. We focus 
on actuating the ankle and hip independently but in the future 
we envision a system that assists multiple joints 
simultaneously during walking.  Although the determinants of 
efficient assistance are largely unknown, the strategy of 
adding external torques to supplement normal muscle work to 
the lower limb joints has been applied with success in 
previous research [17, 20, 21]. The designed multi-joint 
actuation platform can be used to provide torques to the lower 
limb via soft exosuits and explore different assistive strategies 
and their implications to human biomechanics. 
A.  Design Principles for Soft Exosuits 
In general, an exosuit should be able to create paths to 
transfer load between the assisted joint and other parts of the 
body where those forces can be handled without impeding 
natural human walking dynamics and comfort. In previous 
work we have described design principles that can be used to 
achieve this and demonstrated it with functional prototypes 
[18, 22]. Reaction forces created during the actuation should 
be distributed along the suit to minimize the normal pressure. 
In addition, the suit should not restrict muscles from 
expanding during operation. High suit stiffness is required to 
optimize power transfer efficiency and reduce the risk of 
 
Figure 2 Ankle exosuit for plantar flexion actuation and exosuit stiffness 
 
1328
  
chafing.  The peak force that can be generated during each gait 
cycle is also partially dependent on the suit stiffness. Since the 
activation time of the ankle flexor is very short for each gait 
cycle, it requires the actuator to stretch the compliant exosuits 
quickly enough to achieve the desired assistive force, which 
means the softer the exosuit, the higher the speed needed by 
the actuator.  
B.  Ankle Suit (Plantar flexion) 
A suit dedicated to actuating the ankle joint has been 
designed as shown in Figure 2 as an improved version of that 
previously reported in [18]. The suit creates a path that allows 
the transfer of forces between the pelvis and the heel. It is 
composed of a waist belt, two thigh braces, connecting 
webbing straps, two boot attachments and two Bowden cable 
anchor points (A on top of the heel and B at the back of the 
boot) for each leg as shown in Figure 2.  
The ankle suit waist belt is located at the pelvis area (iliac 
crest). It is a bony area less prone to bone-skin movements, 
and hence relatively large forces can be better handled 
compared to other parts of the body. Two webbing straps start 
at the waist belt and merge at a cross point at the front of the 
thigh. From the cross point, another two webbing straps go 
down to the back side of the leg passing through the thigh 
brace and the center of rotation of the knee. These two 
webbing straps merge again on at the back of the calf, forming 
the attachment point for the Bowden cable sheath (A), shown 
in Figure 2. The webbing straps around the boots and merge at 
the back of the heel forming the attachment point for the inner 
cable (B) also shown in Figure 2. When the cable is actuated, 
it generates a force between anchor points A and B that 
produces an upward tension force 6-9cm behind the ankle 
center of rotation, thus creating plantar flexion torque on the 
ankle joint. The suit also creates a flexion torque on the hip 
due to the tension forces in the suit passing 7-10cm in front of 
the hip axis of rotation. The total weight of the ankle exosuit is 
915g (not including the weight of the boots). 
The stiffness of the suit is defined by the properties of the 
fabric, the human body and the interface between the human 
and the suit. A stiff polyester webbing strap was selected as 
the main force transmission fabric of the suit. Due to the 
relatively high stiffness of the suit, the force can be accurately 
delivered to the subject and skin chafing has not been reported 
during the tests. A stiffness measurement for the ankle suit was 
performed by positioning a human subject in walking push off 
pose as shown in Figure 2. The average force at the ankle and 
displacement of the actuator over 10 cycles were recorded. As 
it can be seen from the plot of cable displacement versus 
applied force, a force of 270N force can be applied with a 
cable actuation of 70mm amplitude. In addition, the plot 
shows that the suit increases its effective stiffness up to a value 
of approximately 6000N/m, during the loading process.  
C. Hip Suit (Flexion & Extension) 
A hip exosuit that assists hip flexion and extension during 
walking was also designed and is shown in Figure 3. This 
exosuit is composed of a waist belt, two thigh braces and two 
stretchable webbing straps on each side of the legs for holding 
the thigh braces in place. One pair of anchor points (C,D) for 
Bowden cable sheath attachment on both sides of the waist 
belt above the hip joint, and the other pair of anchor points (E, 
F) for inner cable attachment located at the top center on both 
sides of the thigh brace. Thus, the hip suit creates paths that 
can transfer assistive forces from the attachments on the thigh 
brace to the pelvis area.  When the front cable is actuated, the 
cable applies an upward force on the front side of the hip to 
create a flexion torque. When the rear side cable is actuated, 
the cable creates an extension torque. The total weight of the 
hip suit is 672g. 
Following the same procedure as with the ankle exosuit, 
the effective stiffness was measured both for flexion and for 
extension assistance as shown in Figure 3. The average 
stiffness of the hip suit is lower than the ankle suit because of 
the compliance of the thigh and hip muscles and the lack of a 
solid anatomical feature onto which the distal side of the suit 
can be attached (for comparison, the ankle suit connects to the 
boot, which is relatively rigid). For 130mm cable 
displacement, forces for hip flexion and extension can reach 
approximately 350N with effective stiffnesses  of 4150N/m 
and 6650N/m respectively.  
III. MULTI-JOINT ACTUATION PLATFORM 
Given an understanding of the properties of the exosuits and 
normal biomechanics of human walking, a multi-joint 
actuation platform was designed to deliver forces to the 
lower-limb joints through the soft exosuits.  A general picture 
of the system is shown in Figure 1. The platform contains 
three sets of identical actuation units, each with two actuated 
linear degrees of freedom that connect to Bowden cable 
attachments. The motor controllers, data acquisition card, 
power supply and a target PC were also installed for 
 
Figure 3 Hip exosuit for flexion/extension and exosuit stiffness 
 
1329
  
measuring the sensor signals and controlling the actuators.  
This section describes and evaluates the biological 
requirements for the system, the actuation platform and the 
different sensors integrated in the system. 
A. Biological Requirements 
A requirement for the actuation platform was that it should 
be capable of fully replicating the torques and powers at the 
hip, knee and ankle joint during walking. The requirements for 
defining torque and speed for the actuator were obtained from 
human gait data [23] and the effective stiffness of the suit for 
each joint as described in the previous section. For an 80kg 
subject walking at 1.25m/s, the average peak joint torque for 
ankle, knee and hip are 130N/m, 40N/m, and 104N/m, 
respectively. The average peak angular speed for those joints 
are  4.5rad/s, 7.3rad/s, and 3.5rad/s , calculated from the 
human gait data [23]. To translate torque and rotational 
motion into force and linear movement, the moment arm for 
each joint was estimated based on our current suit which was 
designed for 160cm-200cm height subjects with a body mass 
index from 20 to 30. Due to the soft textile nature of the 
exosuits, they can be easily adapted to anatomical variations. 
The minimum required speed for the actuators is the result of 
evaluating the effect of biological joint speed plus the extra 
displacement required to stretch the exosuit in order to 
generate the necessary forces. The biological data and 
resulting actuator specifications that follow the biological 
requirements are listed in Table 1. 
B. Mechanical Design of Bowden Cable Actuator 
Based on the requirements depicted in Table 1, a Bowden 
cable actuator box has been designed as shown in Figure 4. 
The Bowden cable sheath connects to the outer frame of the 
actuator box and the inner cable is attached to a ball screw 
actuated carriage which can drive the inner cable back and 
forth. Three actuation boxes with different gear ratios were 
designed to actuate the ankle, knee and hip, or a combination 
of them at the same time. A Maxon EC-4 pole brushless motor 
and gearbox with a 4.3:1 gear ratio is attached to the 
aluminum frame. A spring disc coupler connects the motor 
shaft to another steel shaft resting on a stronger ball bearing to 
avoid high lateral forces on the timing belt that would damage 
the bearings in the gearbox. A 12.7mm pitch ball screw is 
connected on the other side of the timing belt pulley to 
translate the rotational motion into a linear movement. An 
aluminum carriage is thread jointed to the nut of the ball screw. 
It is guided by four linear ball bearings, two on each side. The 
Bowden cable inner wire rope is fixed to the small aluminum 
block and secured by a wind screw. With the Bowden cable 
sheath attached on the outer box frame, the linear carriage 
transmits its linear movement to actuate different biological 
joints with the exosuit.   
To uphold design flexibility and enable the adaptation of 
the system’s force/speed ratio to different joints and to 
different exosuit designs, the gear ratio of the actuator is easily 
adaptable by swapping the timing belt pulleys exposed at the 
rear side of the actuation box.  
C. Sensing and Instrumentation 
In addition to providing actuation, the system also 
includes sensors to enable real-time feedback control and data 
logging at a frequency of 1 kHz. A Maxon 4 line encoder (500 
counts/rev) is installed on the back of the motor for measuring 
the motor speed and a linear potentiometer (P3 America, Inc.) 
with a resolution of 0.1mm is placed under the ball screw and 
connected to the carriage to measure the displacement of the 
actuation cable. A Futek load cell with a measuring range of 
±2224N (2N resolution) is placed between the carriage and 
the aluminum Bowden cable block to measure the tension 
force in the actuation cable before the Bowden cable 
transmission. At the distal ends of the Bowden cable, there is 
another Futek load cell with a measuring range of ±1112N 
(1N resolution) to measure the actual force applied to the 
exosuit and wearer. Foot switches are placed in the boots for 
detecting heel strike events to characterize the phase of the 
gait cycle.  
Matlab xPC Target was programmed by using Matlab 
Simulink environment for the real time control 
implementation.  The data acquisition card PCI-6259 was 
selected to acquire the sensor signals and send reference 
voltage to the Copley ACP-090-36 Accelnet controller. 
Current and voltage sensors are built in the Copley Accelnet 
motor controller.    
These sensors allow measuring the amount of energy 
consumed by the system, the efficiency of the mechanical 
transmission, and the power delivered to the human body and 
 
Figure 4 Modular designed reconfigurable Bowden cable actuation box 
 
 
 
TABLE I ACTUATOR BOX DESIGN SPECIFICATIONS 
 
Ankle Knee Hip 
Range of motion of biolgocial joints (Deg) 27 70 29 
Peak speed of biological joints (rad/s) 4.5 7.3 3.5 
Biological joint moments (Nm) 130 40 104 
Estimated exosuit moment arm (m) 0.085 0.07 0.1 
Actuator minimum travel (m) 0.13 0.11 0.11 
Actuator minimum speed (m/s) 1.5 2 1.6 
Actuator peak force (N) 1466 571 1040 
 
1330
  
to the exosuit. Therefore, the performance of the system and 
assistive control strategies can be evaluated with this platform.  
C. Actuator Characterization 
1) Actuator Bandwidth 
The bandwidth of the most highly geared actuator (for the 
ankle joint) was evaluated experimentally to characterize the 
performance of the system. The actuator position and force 
bandwidth were measured by commanding swept sinusoidal 
position and force signals (from 0.1 to 30Hz) of 50mm and 
100N (100mm and 200N peak to peak) for the closed-loop 
position and force controller. The control loops were closed 
using the position signals acquired from the linear 
potentiometer and the force signal from the load cell at the 
wearer-side of the Bowden cable. Both signals were filtered 
by a 1st order low pass filter with a cutoff frequency of 50Hz. 
The distal end of the Bowden cable was hanging free when 
implementing the position bandwidth test. However, for the 
force bandwidth test, the distal end of the inner cable with the 
load cell and the cable sheath were fixed to a rigid element. 
Magnitudes and phases of the reference signal and output 
signals were recorded at each frequency. The closed loop 
system magnitude and phase were obtained by comparing the 
recorded signals. More data points of the closed loop system 
were interpreted in Matlab to create a smoother presentation 
of the Bode plot. 
The results shown in Figure 5 demonstrate that the actuator 
position control bandwidth is around 3Hz with a phase margin 
of -46˚ while the force control bandwidth is on the order of 
20Hz with a phase margin of -161˚. 
2) Safety 
Mechanical and software protections were implemented to 
ensure safe operation of the system. The mechanical stops on 
the actuator can adjust the hard limits of the actuator position 
over a range from 0mm to 160mm. These stops can hold up to 
1500N force when fully fastened onto the stainless steel rods. 
In addition, there are adjustable software limits in the control 
box. Once the actuator reaches the safety limits, the control 
program will immediately send the actuator to the distal end to 
make the cable slack in order to avoid providing any force to 
the user. When delivering the assistance, the assistive force 
increases gradually to allow the user to get used to the system. 
The target force profile reaches its maximum after 3 minutes 
of normal walking. Due to the soft nature of the system, the 
compliance and elasticity protects the actuator from the shock 
and more importantly the assistive forces are inherently 
limited mechanically [24, 25]. Unsafe conditions arise when 
some of the sensors stop providing signals (either by loosened 
or worn-out wires). To address this potentially unsafe 
condition, a script was implemented in Matlab for comparing 
input signals. The DAQ reads the raw signals from the sensors, 
and if the program discovers a faulty or anomalous signal, the 
program will send the actuator to the distal end. An emergency 
switch which depowers all the actuators when pressed was 
also installed in the system. A temperature sensor was 
installed on each of the Maxon motor’s heat sink to protect 
them from overheating. The system shuts down the motor 
controller when a motor reaches 120˚ C.  
IV. JOINT-LEVEL CONTROL  
A. Force Trajectory Design and Implementation 
While the actuation platform is capable of delivering 
100% of the torque required to match that of the biological 
joints for an 80kg subject, the current exosuit designs allow 
15% of the total torque required by the joint to be delivered. 
Figure 6 shows the required torque for the ankle and hip joints 
during walking for a gait cycle starting with heel strike of one 
leg to the next heel strike of the same leg. The force profiles 
are the standardized joint torques profiles adopted from [23] 
divided by the moment arms of the current ankle and hip 
exosuits. For an 80kg wearer, the 15% force trajectories 
would have peak forces of 240N, 130N, and 160N for ankle, 
hip flexion and extension respectively. The hip suit spans just 
the hip joint and so does not exert reacting torques to any other 
joint when actuated, thus the commanded force profile for the 
hip is the total joint force scaled by 15% as shown at the top 
part of Figure 6. The force profile for hip flexion is actuated 
from 35% to 75% of the gait cycle. The force profile 
commanded for hip extension actuation is the remaining 
portion of the hip force profile.  
The force profile for actuating the ankle cannot simply be 
directly scaled by 15% due to the structure of the ankle suit 
that creates a force path between the ankle and the pelvis 
passing through the center of rotation of the knee and the 
anterior part of the hip joint. Since the suit goes through the 
center of rotation of the knee, no torque is provided to this 
joint; however, there is a corresponding hip flexion torque 
added while actuating the ankle joint. In order to avoid 
hindering the hip joint the commanded force profile to the 
ankle begins when the applied force benefits both joints 
(around 35% of the gait cycle) as shown at the bottom part of 
Figure 6. The reference force follows the hip flexion profile 
until the scaled ankle force profile intersects with the hip force 
profile. Thus, the force trajectory for ankle plantar flexion is a 
combined curve, which assists the ankle joint and hip joint 
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
-40
-30
-20
-10
0
10
Magnitude(dB)
10
-1
10
0
10
1
10
2
-200
-150
-100
-50
0
Phase(Degree)
Frequency(Hz)
 
 
Force Closed Loop
Position Closed Loop
 
Figure 5 Actuator's bandwidth test results 
 
 
1331
  
from 35% to 60% of the gait cycle. With this design, it is 
guaranteed that beneficial forces are provided simultaneously 
to the ankle and to the hip flexion by using only one actuator 
and hence increasing the system efficiency [18].  
In order to implement the actuation scheme, the 
normalized reference force trajectories for each joint were 
pre-computed and saved in the controller. The control 
algorithm adapts those profiles by scaling them based on the 
step frequency obtained by the foot switches in real-time. The 
heel strike signal from the foot switch was used to segment the 
gait cycle percentage and to trigger the force control.  Since 
there is a mechanical delay for the foot switches, the heel 
strike signal corresponded to 20ms after the starting point of 
the gait cycle.   
B. Admittance Controller Design 
The force control of the soft exosuits is implemented by 
using a position-based admittance controller with force as an 
input.  In general, an admittance controller structure for this 
application is comprised of a cascade-like controller in which 
there is a position loop, and an outer force loop. The position 
and force signals are obtained from the linear potentiometer in 
the actuation unit and load cell on the wearer side of the 
Bowden cable. This allows for measurement of human-suit 
interaction forces to determine different virtual inertia, 
damping and stiffness properties for the transmitted force 
profile which guarantees safety and stability in the system. A 
distal end-point admittance controller for the Bowden cable 
actuator was implemented as shown in Figure 7. The virtual 
admittance transforms a force error into a desired position that 
is then sent to the inner-position control loop. The admittance 
equation is defined in the Laplace domain as follows: 
2
1
v vv
x
Y
F M s b sK
= =
? + ?+
 
Where M
v
, b
v
, K
v
,
 
x, F, and Y
 
define the virtual inertia, 
damping, stiffness, cable displacement, local assistive force 
and the virtual admittance respectively. Considering that the 
position controller compensates for the actuator dynamics and 
friction, only the defined virtual mass, damping and stiffness 
are felt by the human [26]. 
In contrast to pure force control which rejects position 
disturbance in order to track a given reference force trajectory, 
the position compensator attempts to comply with the 
environmental interaction and react quickly to position 
changes of the end point by rapidly modifying the inner loop 
trajectory. By setting saturations on the position reference, the 
actuator will stop moving further if it reaches the hardware 
limits. The designer can define position and force limits in the 
system, thus reducing the potential risks of inadvertent forces 
to the actuator and the subject. 
V. HUMAN WALKING EXPERIMENTS 
A pilot study, approved by the Harvard Medical School 
Committee on Human Studies, to study ankle plantar flexion 
and hip flexion assistance during treadmill walking was 
performed. The human subject experiments were carried out 
on an 80kg male subject. The admittance control described in 
the previous section was validated during these tests. Two 
trials were performed, consisting of the subject walking for 2 
 
Figure 7 Block diagram of the admittance controller 
 
 
Figure 6 Force trajectory for ankle and hip soft exosuits 
1332
  
minutes while wearing the ankle and the hip flexion exosuits 
described in Section II. During the experiments, two 
conditions were considered: an assistive mode in which the 
actuation platform provides forces to the user during walking 
and a “slack” or transparent mode that consists on pushing the 
cable out, which allows the system to passively avoid 
providing any interaction forces to the user while walking. 
Under transparent mode, the exosuit does not constrain or 
apply forces to the wearer, thus it does not change the wearer’s 
natural kinetics. Having the ability to make the suit transparent 
is a significant benefit of this approach as well as enabling the 
implementation of other strategies such as making the system 
transparent when a low-battery condition is detected. This 
approach is not possible to implement with traditional rigid 
exoskeletons since the user will need to take off the system in 
order to be able to walk freely again in the event of low-battery 
or power loss. 
Figure 8 shows force measurements during 4 walking gait 
cycles consisting of 2 actuated followed by 2-non actuated 
(transparent mode) cycles for both exosuits (ankle plantar 
flexion and hip flexion). As it can be seen, the system can 
deliver accurate force trajectories to the wearer. In addition, 
when the system is commanded to be in transparent mode the 
measured force is 0N and hence does not impede the wearer’s 
gait.  
The corresponding total mechanical energy transmitted to 
the exosuit and human by the actuation platform is measured 
by using the total cable displacement and the local force 
measured at the wearer side. In order to understand the energy 
transfer process, it is important to know the energy flow on the 
exosuit. Based on the exosuit stiffness discussed in section II, 
the average displacement of the exosuit during a gait cycle can 
be calculated from the average local force profile during 
loading and unloading conditions; the power delivered to the 
exosuit can then be obtained by multiplying the measured 
local force and the estimated anchor point speed (derivative of 
the exosuit displacement). Thus, the power delivered to the 
joint is the total mechanical power delivered minus the power 
delivered to the exosuit. The power transfer process is directly 
related to the efficiency and performance of our system and 
will allow optimizing assistive strategies for future fully 
mobile systems. 
Figure 9 shows the average power results for a gait cycle 
for both ankle plantar flexion and hip flexion actuation during 
walking. It can be seen that since the start of the actuation 
(35%), most of the total power delivered by the actuation 
platform is stored by the ankle and hip soft-exosuits until 
approximately 46% and 50% of the gait cycle respectively; 
this occurs due to the inherent compliance of the exosuit. At 
this point, the exosuit transfers most of the stored energy to the 
human biological joints. All of the energy stored is not 
returned due to the exosuit hysteresis as described in Section 
II.  
For the human walking trials presented in Figure 9, the 
system delivered 4.01W on average over a gait cycle of 1.08 
seconds with the ankle suit, and 3.27 W on average over a gait 
cycle of 1.06 seconds for the hip suit. The total energy 
delivered by the system over a single gait cycle was 4.33J and 
3.47J respectively. During each gait cycle, the ankle joint 
received 3.02 J for an efficiency of 70%. The hip joint 
received 1.67 J for the flexion with an efficiency of 48%. 
Compared to biological joint power, the system provided 
14.3% of energy needed by the ankle and 9.6% of energy 
needed by the hip for flexion. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
In conclusion, we have presented the design of a multi-joint 
actuation platform for lower extremity soft ankle and hip 
exosuits designed to assist ankle plantar flexion and hip 
Figure 8 Admittance controller force test on the ankle plantar flexion and hip 
flexion 
 
Figure 9  Average power delivered from the sytem, average power delivered 
to the suit and biological joints 
1333
  
flexion/extension during walking. With the modular, 6-DOF 
actuation platform, desired forces can be delivered to 
biological joints simultaneously through multiple Bowden 
cables. From the human walking experiments, it is 
demonstrated that desired force trajectory profiles, a 
percentage of Winter’s biomechanics data [23], can be 
accurately followed with an admittance controller. The 
actuation platform includes integrated instrumentation on the 
robot and wearer side so that the power delivered to the suit 
and biological joints can be calculated. This enables us to 
compare the efficiency of different controllers directly.  
Future work will focus on developing adaptive control 
strategies to optimize the force profile for each individual. 
Also, different control and assistive strategies for 
simultaneous multi-joint control of lower-limb exosuits will 
be tested to evaluate their effects on human biomechanics, 
metabolic cost and muscular activation. This will be 
performed with human subject studies measuring kinematics, 
kinetics and EMG.  
VII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Robert Dyer, Arnar 
Larusson, and Ken Holt for their input during this project. The 
authors would also like to thank Copley Controls Corporation 
for providing Accelnet motor controllers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. M. Dollar, and H. Herr, “Lower extremity exoskeletons and active 
orthoses: Challenges and state-of-the-art,” Robotics, IEEE 
Transactions on, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 144-158, 2008. 
[2] A. B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and A. Chu, “Biomechanical design of the 
Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton (BLEEX),” Mechatronics, 
IEEE/ASME Transactions on, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 128-138, 2006. 
[3] C. J. Walsh, K. Endo, and H. Herr, “A quasi-passive leg exoskeleton for 
load-carrying augmentation,” International Journal of Humanoid 
Robotics, vol. 4, no. 03, pp. 487-506, 2007. 
[4] J. E. Pratt, B. T. Krupp, C. J. Morse, and S. H. Collins, "The RoboKnee: 
an exoskeleton for enhancing strength and endurance during walking.", 
Robotics and Automation, 2004. Proceedings. ICRA'04. 2004 IEEE 
International Conference on, vol. 3, pp. 2430-2435. IEEE, 2004. 
[5]  H. Herr, “Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation,” Journal of 
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 6, pp. 21, 2009. 
[6] H. A. Quintero, R. J. Farris, C. Hartigan, I. Clesson, and M. Goldfarb, 
“A powered lower limb orthosis for providing legged mobility in 
paraplegic individuals,” Topics in spinal cord injury rehabilitation, 
vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 25-33, 2011. 
[7] G. S. Sawicki, and D. P. Ferris, "A pneumatically powered 
knee-ankle-foot orthosis (KAFO) with myoelectric activation and 
inhibition." Journal of neuroengineering and rehabilitation 6, no. 1 
(2009): 23.  
[8] W. van Dijk, H. van der Kooij, and E. Hekman, "A passive exoskeleton 
with artificial tendons: Design and experimental evaluation.", 
Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2011 IEEE International 
Conference on, pp. 1-6. IEEE, 2011. 
[9] M. Goldfarb, and W. K. Durfee, “Design of a controlled-brake orthosis 
for FES-aided gait,” Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions 
on, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 13-24, 1996. 
[10] P. D. Neuhaus, J. H. Noorden, T. J. Craig, T. Torres, J. Kirschbaum, 
and J. E. Pratt,  "Design and evaluation of mina: A robotic orthosis for 
paraplegics." Rehabilitation Robotics (ICORR), 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on, pp. 1-8. IEEE, 2011.  
[11] S. K. Banala, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, "Active Leg Exoskeleton 
(ALEX) for gait rehabilitation of motor-impaired patients." 
Rehabilitation Robotics, 2007. ICORR 2007. IEEE 10th International 
Conference on, pp. 401-407. IEEE, 2007. 
[12] S. K. Banala, S. H. Kim, S. K. Agrawal, and J. P. Scholz, “Robot 
assisted gait training with active leg exoskeleton (ALEX),” Neural 
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 
17, no. 1, pp. 2-8, 2009. 
[13] J. Hu, Y.-J. Lim, Y. Ding, D. Paluska, A. Solochek, D. Laffery, P. 
Bonato, and R. Marchessault, "An advanced rehabilitation robotic 
system for augmenting healthcare." Engineering in Medicine and 
Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the 
IEEE, pp. 2073-2076. IEEE, 2011. 
[14] H. Kawamoto, S. Lee, S. Kanbe, and Y. Sankai, "Power assist method 
for HAL-3 using EMG-based feedback controller." Systems, Man and 
Cybernetics, 2003. IEEE International Conference on, vol. 2, pp. 
1648-1653. IEEE, 2003. 
[15] A. Schiele, "Ergonomics of exoskeletons: Objective performance 
metrics." EuroHaptics conference, 2009 and Symposium on Haptic 
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World 
Haptics 2009. Third Joint, pp. 103-108. IEEE, 2009. 
[16] J. Cool, “Biomechanics of orthoses for the subluxed shoulder,” 
Prosthetics and Orthotics international, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 90-96, 
1989. 
[17] M. Wehner, B. Quinlivan, P. M. Aubin, E. Martinez-Villalpando, M. 
Baumann, L. Stirling, K. Holt, R. Wood, and C. Walsh, “A Lightweight 
Soft Exosuit for Gait Assistance,” Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 
2013 IEEE International Conference on, pp. 3347-3354, 2013. 
[18] A. T. Asbeck, R. J. Dyer, A. F. Larusson, and C. J. Walsh, 
“Biologically-inspired Soft Exosuit,” Rehabilitation Robotics, 2013. 
ICORR 2013. IEEE 16th International Conference on, Rehabilitation 
Robotics:[proceedings], vol. 2013, pp. 1-8. 2013. 
[19] M. Wehner, Y.-L. Park, C. Walsh, R. Nagpal, R. J. Wood, T. Moore, 
and E. Goldfield,  "Experimental characterization of components for 
active soft orthotics." Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics 
(BioRob), 2012 4th IEEE RAS & EMBS International Conference on, 
pp. 1586-1592. IEEE, 2012. 
[20] G. S. Sawicki, and D. P. Ferris, “Mechanics and energetics of level 
walking with powered ankle exoskeletons,” Journal of Experimental 
Biology, vol. 211, no. 9, pp. 1402-1413, 2008. 
[21] G. S. Sawicki, and D. P. Ferris, “Powered ankle exoskeletons reveal the 
metabolic cost of plantar flexor mechanical work during walking with 
longer steps at constant step frequency,” Journal of Experimental 
Biology, vol. 212, no. 1, pp. 21-31, 2009. 
[22] M. Wehner, D. Rempel, and H. Kazerooni, "Lower Extremity 
Exoskeleton Reduces Back Forces in Lifting." ASME, 2009. 
[23] D. A. Winter, Biomechanics and motor control of human gait: normal, 
elderly and pathological, 1991. 
[24] G. A. Pratt, and M. M. Williamson,  "Series elastic actuators." 
Intelligent Robots and Systems 95.'Human Robot Interaction and 
Cooperative Robots', Proceedings. 1995 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on, vol. 1, pp. 399-406. IEEE, 1995 
[24]   I. Galiana, F. L. Hammond, R. D. Howe, and M. B. Popovic. "Wearable 
soft robotic device for post-stroke shoulder rehabilitation: Identifying 
misalignments." In Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, pp. 317-322. IEEE, 2012. 
[25]  A. Peer, "Design and Control of Admittance-Type Telemanipulation 
Systems." VDI-Verlag, 2008. 
 
1334
