Guidance of a High Dexterity Robot under 3D Ultrasound for
Minimally Invasive Retrieval of Foreign Bodies from a Beating Heart
Paul Thienphrapa, Aleksandra Popovic, and Russell H. Taylor
Abstract— Particles such as thrombi, bullet fragments, and
shrapnel can become trapped in a person’s heart after migrat-
ing through the venous system, or by direct penetration. These
cardiac foreign bodies pose a serious health risk as they can
interfere with cardiovascular function. Conventional treatment
often requires open heart surgery, cardiopulmonary bypass, and
a long incision of the heart muscle, which come with signiﬁcant
risk and recovery time. To circumvent these disadvantages,
we propose a minimally invasive surgical approach using 3D
ultrasound to guide a dexterous robotic capture device.
Analysis of the foreign body trajectory indicates highly
erratic motion, rendering a robotic retrieval strategy based on
direct pursuit of the tracked target infeasible. To provide a
relatively slow robot with the ability to retrieve such a target,
we propose alternative strategies based on guiding a robot to
a salient capture location, and ambushing the target upon its
reappearance. In this paper, we demonstrate the use of 3D
transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) in tracking a foreign
body in a beating heart phantom, computing a suitable capture
location, and guiding a high dexterity robot to secure the target.
I. INTRODUCTION
Foreign bodies introduced into the heart pose serious
health risks, having the potential to cause arrhythmia, oc-
clusion, neurotic manifestations, and even death [1], [2], in
both civilian and military populations [3], [4]. Examples of
cardiac foreign bodies include thrombi following myocardial
infarction, small bullets and shell fragments that circulate
freely in the chambers [1], [2], and other debris emerging
from the venous system. Surgical treatment traditionally
requires a median sternotomy followed by an incision in the
pericardium [3], [5]–[7]. The procedure is highly invasive,
involving long recovery periods and numerous health risks.
A minimally invasive operation on a beating heart can help
mitigate the risks associated with sternotomy and cardiopul-
monary bypass, and can potentially reduce procedure times.
However, inhibited surgical access and visualization, and the
motion of the foreign body in the heart, make the retrieval
task difﬁcult. To tackle these challenges, we proposed a pro-
cedure using a dexterous robotic device inserted transapically
into the heart, and a 3D transesophageal echocardiography
(TEE) probe to provide internal visualization. Under intra-
operative 3D ultrasound guidance, the robot moves to secure
the target, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Manuscript received September 15, 2013 and revised January 22, 2014.
This work was supported in part by Philips Research North America and
in part by Johns Hopkins University internal funds.
Paul Thienphrapa and Russell H. Taylor are with the ERC
CISST/LCSR, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
fpault,rhtg@cs.jhu.edu.
Aleksandra Popovic is with Philips Research North America, Briarcliff
Manor, NY 10510, USAaleksandra.popovic@philips.com.
US Beacon
(on tip)
Foreign 
Body
3D TEE
Probe
Combined
RCM Robot and
Dexterous Manipulator
Workstation 
Computer
Philips 3D
Ultrasound
X-ray Fluoroscopy
or Cone Beam CT
TEE
Dexterous Manipulator
Fig. 1. Minimally invasive robotic retrieval of cardiac foreign bodies under
3D ultrasound guidance. Though not used in this study, CBCT integration
is a future direction of interest.
In a previous study we tracked a foreign body in a beating
heart phantom to characterize foreign body motion [8]. Then
using an existing surgical robot, we demonstrated that the
motion of the foreign body exceeds the ability of the robot
to pursue it [9]. We thus introduced indirect capture strategies
[8], [10] in which the moving target is ambushed rather than
chased, thereby relaxing robot performance requirements.
In the present study we introduce a new dexterous min-
imally invasive surgical robot with 11 degrees of freedom
(DOFs). We test our 3D TEE-based tracking and capture
strategies in a live setting through experiments involving the
retrieval of a foreign body from a beating heart phantom. A
brief summary of the present system appears in an abstract
[11]. The current paper presents the system in considerably
more detail and includes new experimental results.
II. RELATED WORK
Three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiography (TTE)
is used to track a surgical instrument ﬁtted with passive
markers by Stoll et al. [12] with 1.0 mm of accuracy and a
2-Hz control rate. In subsequent experiments, similar results
were obtained when targets were also tracked [13]. Liang
et al. [14] performed needle-touch experiments with 1.2
mm of error; ultrasound targets were then embedded in
chicken breast to mimic a breast biopsy procedure. In water
tank experiments, the tracking error of a one-DOF heartbeat
compensation device for mitral valve repair was found to
be about 1.0 mm when using a predictive controller running
at an 8-Hz control rate [15]. This work was extended to
ultrasound servoing of a cardiac catheter [16].
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4869
Studies on ultrasound guidance have centered around 2D
probes; nevertheless, the insights may abstract to 3D. For
example, B-mode images of an object are referenced to a
model object [17], [18] to reveal the pose of a robot-held
probe. The known shapes of surgical tools can be leveraged
in a similar fashion [19], [20]. V olumetric images can be
constructed by sweeping a 2D probe [21], [22].
In a more tracking-focused study, a variable magnetic
ﬁeld was used to vibrate otherwise invisible ferrous targets,
allowing for localization to within 1.1 mm [23]. This theme
is retained in the use of piezoelectric buzzers to induce
vibrations in a surgical tool [24].
Recent developments feature applications of 3D ultrasound
in cardiac surgery. In the work of Moore et al. [25], 3D
TEE is used for manual guidance of a novel cardiac surgical
instrument. With a transesophageal probe tracked by an
electromagnetic tracker, the surgeon identiﬁes the mitral
valve in the image, allowing the system to create an image
overlay of the structure. The instrument position is also
tracked and incorporated into an augmented reality view,
helping the surgeon guide the instrument towards the mitral
valve. In Gosline et al. [26], a surgeon uses 3D ultrasound
to guide via teleoperation a concentric tube robot to place a
patent foramen ovale closure device.
The work discussed herein bears some key distinc-
tions from the aforementioned studies. The ﬁrst is the 3D
ultrasound-based guidance of a robot with distal dexterity,
leading to enhanced workspace coverage inside the heart.
This is in contrast to rigid instruments that rely predom-
inantly on pivots about the surgical entry point (remote
center of motion, or RCM); tools whose distal degree of
freedom travels along its axis of insertion [15]; dexterous
devices with motion constraints such as catheters [16] and
concentric tubes [26]; and devices that are guided manually
[25], [26]. Internal dexterity further implies that manipulation
respecting the RCM point requires appropriate redundancy
resolution, as opposed to the technique of mirroring motions
about said point [13]. Another distinguishing factor relates
to the proposed task, i.e., demonstration of 3D ultrasound in
guiding a robot to capture an erratically moving target, in
a dynamic environment. Finally, our 3D ultrasound control
bandwidth of approximately 20 Hz is higher than previously
reported for robot guidance, and is well suited for tasks of
this nature, including tracking of the heart wall [27].
III. REVIEW: FOREIGN BODIES IN THE HEART
This section reviews the ﬁndings of our previous ef-
forts [8]–[10] in understanding foreign body behavior. Such
knowledge is critical in moving forward with the design of
a robotic system and capture strategies, so previous results
are summarized here for context.
A. Tracking and Motion Characterization
In a precursor study [8], a 3.2-mm steel ball was inserted
into the left ventricle of a beating heart phantom to mimic
a clinical trauma case. The chosen stroke volume, about
18 ml, is lower than in healthy humans, reﬂecting surgical
[28] and cardiovascular conditions following heart injury.
Ultrasound volumes were acquired at rate of about 20 frames
per second. Tracking of the foreign body was performed
using 3D normalized cross-correlation (NCC), a commonly
used template matching algorithm, with an RMS error of
2.3 mm. Despite occasional instances of loss of tracking,
which were both detectable and recoverable, the beneﬁts of
this approach were its simple implementation and real-time
computational performance.
The experiments revealed foreign body speeds of 343.5
mm/s, comparable to and in agreement with ﬁgures for the
heart wall (300 mm/s [29]) and mitral valve (200 mm/s [15]).
There was also a considerable amount of irregular motion, as
indicated by signiﬁcant frequency components of the motion
above the 1-Hz heartbeats.
Despite the challenging robot performance requirements,
a straightforward chasing experiment was nevertheless at-
tempted using a low dexterity robot [9]. However, for the
robot to reach the target to within a reasonable amount of
error (2.1 mm), the speed of the virtual target had to be
reduced by a factor of 9. This result highlights the need for
robots with the distal dexterity to navigate the heart chamber.
Even then, millimeter-level accuracy may be difﬁcult to
attain at speed, so careful planning may be preferred over
direct pursuit.
B. Capture Locations
Chasing a foreign body inside a beating heart may be
hazardous; as well, the foreign body exhibits a preference
towards a subsection of the overall volume. These factors
motivate a relaxed retrieval approach wherein the end ef-
fector is aimed at a location where likelihood of intercept
is greatest. We previously outlined the following criteria for
computing these capture locations [8], [10].
1) Spatial probability: Which locations are expected to
contain the foreign body the most?
2) Dwell time: How long does the foreign body dwell in a
certain location before it leaves? When it leaves, how
long before it returns?
3) Visit frequency: How often does the foreign body visit,
or traverse, a certain location?
In sum, the foreign body is in the most probable location
50.5% of the time, dwells in the most dwelled location for
0.84 seconds at a time, and visits the most visited location
at a rate of 1.54 Hz. Fig. 2 shows a probability map for
qualitative intuition. Red regions indicate where the foreign
body is likely to be captured. In the envisioned operation, the
system observes the fragment motion, computes a capture
location in real time, and guides the robot to this location
taking into consideration the probability of success, reacha-
bility, and manipulability.
IV. ROBOT SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
The 11-DOF robot (Fig. 3) used in this study is a new
system, composed of a new four-DOF snake robot (based
on an existing design [30]–[34]) attached serially to an
existing seven-DOF LARS robot [35]. The JHU snake robot,
4870
Fig. 2. Spatial probability map of the foreign body position. (Left and
center) Coronal and sagittal slices. (Right) 3D view.
End disc
Spacer discs
Base disc 
Primary backbone (red)
Secondary backbones (green)
?
?
z
Fig. 3. The 11-DOF high dexterity robot, formed by a seven-DOF LARS
robot holding a four-DOF snake robot. The snake robot consists of two
two-DOF segments (the DOFs of each segment are shown in the drawing),
giving rise to the S-bend capability shown in the inset.
originally designed for laryngeal surgery, features a small
dexterous manipulator totaling 39.5 mm in length with a
4.2-mm diameter, appearing at the distal end of a 284.0-
mm long stem. As shown in Fig. 3, the DOFs of each of the
two serial snake segments include the angle of bend from the
local z-axis (q), and the angle of the bending plane about
this z-axis (d). The IBM/JHU LARS robot, meanwhile, was
originally designed as a laparoscopic tool holder with three
translational DOFs (X, Y , and Z), three rotational DOFs (RX,
RY , and a q about the tool axis), and an insertion DOF s
along the tool axis.
The kinematic redundancy and dexterity offered by this
union provides the ﬂexibility to implement modes of control
tailored to different parts of the procedure. The combination
robot is abstracted as a single unit through a hybrid motion
controller: a Galil DMC-4080 for the LARS and a custom
FireWire-based device [36] for the snake. Software is based
on the cisst libraries.
A. Robot Control
We are interested in resolving the spatial redundancy of the
11-DOF LARS-snake robot while satisfying task goals and
respecting motion restrictions, whether in conﬁguration space
(joint limits) or the workspace (e.g. forbidden regions). These
requirements can be formulated as an optimization problem
[37]. A weighted constrained least squares optimization
problem that solves for a set of joint incrementsDq takes the
form of (1). To produce robot motions (J(q)Dq) reﬂecting
commanded ones (t) within joint limits (q
lower
, q
upper
), we
formulate objectives and constraints as follows.
minimize
Dq
kW(J(q)Dq t)k
subject to HDq h:
(1)
J(q) is the instantaneous Jacobian matrix relating the task
and joint space velocities, H =[I; I]
T
, and h=[(q
lower
 
q) (q
upper
  q)]. W is a diagonal matrix specifying the
weight of each degree of freedom. The robot motion is slow
and approximately linear for small increments, so dynamic
effects are excluded. Multiple objectives and constraints can
be incorporated by concatenating the associated matrices.
Through adjustment of W in (1) [37], the optimization
framework allows for various modes of operation as pre-
scribed by application requirements. Coarse positioning can
be achieved by assigning higher priorities to the LARS joints;
this is useful, for example, in the initial robot placement. Fine
positioning can be realized by preferring the snake joints.
Furthermore, the dexterity of the snake can be augmented
by some or all of the LARS joints.
The framework also enables the creation of virtual ﬁxtures,
such as a virtual RCM [38]. Upon a user-initiated transition
to RCM mode, a ﬁxed point on the snake stem is designated
as the RCM. Constraints that restrict transverse motions from
this point are then engaged.
A highly dexterous robot provides a number of beneﬁts
over straight tools, manual or robotic. An RCM limits the
workspace of a straight tool, and the entry port itself may
further reduce the workspace by restricting the available
pivot range. With a dexterous tool, much of the mobility
is transferred to the inside of the body, leading to enhanced
workspace coverage while reducing the external motion en-
velope of the robot. Finally, robotic control is advantageous
because high dexterity can be difﬁcult to manage intuitively.
V. EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
The setup for retrieval experiments is illustrated in Fig. 4.
It consists of a beating heart phantom (Section III-A) to
recreate the clinical scenario, an ultrasound system to image
the scene, a high dexterity robot (Section IV) to capture the
foreign body, and a PC for tracking and guidance.
The ultrasound system consists of a Philips iE33 xMA-
TRIX Echocardiography System and an X7-2t 3D TEE
probe. V olumes are streamed at about 20 frames per second
over TCP/IP to the PC (2 GHz Xeon dual-core CPU, 4 GB
of RAM) for processing and tracking. The image resolution
is 176 96 176, spanning a ﬁeld of view of 60

azimuth,
30

elevation, and 12 cm depth. Gain and compression are
set at 49% and 40 dB respectively.
4871
Lars
Robot
Snake Robot
iE33 Ultrasound
System
Beating Heart
Phantom
X7-2t TEE
Probe
(Inset)
Fig. 4. Setup for 3D ultrasound (TEE) guidance experiments using a high
dexterity robot to capture a foreign body in a beating heart phantom.
A small 1:63:2 mm magnet is afﬁxed to the snake robot
tip to act as an abstract capture device with high attractive
force within the capture range and negligible effect beyond it.
The magnet was tested by advancing it vertically downwards
towards a foreign body resting in water. The attraction dis-
tance was found to be 4.2 mm over 20 repetitions. Although
a different capture mechanism, such as suction, may have
a more lenient capture range, dexterous targeting of the end
effector remains important as it can help reduce perioperative
time, improve capture certainty, and minimize blood loss
over undirected suction.
B. Procedure
1) Preoperative registration: The robot is moved to var-
ious positions to generate a set of points in robot
and image coordinate systems, from which a transfor-
mation matrix is computed. The ﬁducial registration
error (FRE) was 1.1 mm, a reasonable result given the
resolution of about 0.8 mm/pixel.
2) RCM placement: In coarse positioning mode, the robot
is teleoperated to the surgical entry point at the apex
of the heart phantom. The RCM is deﬁned upon user-
initiated switch to dexterous/RCM mode.
3) Tracking initialization: The foreign body is selected
from ultrasound images of the heart phantom for use
as a template to track the foreign body henceforth.
4) Capture location computation: The foreign body track-
ing loop is activated, and the tracked positions are used
to compute a capture location in real time.
5) Robot guidance: Once a capture location is found, the
robot is guided to capture the foreign body.
Under the spatial probability method, a capture location
emerges once a probability reaches 50%; when using the
dwell time approach, a peak measurement that is twice that of
the runner up is used as the decision threshold. These values
are inspired by ﬁndings from our previous work [39]. The
visit rate method is not included in this set of experiments
as it is more suited for a net-like mechanism that captures a
target in transit. A capture is successful if the foreign body
attaches to the magnetic tip without disengaging for at least
ﬁve seconds, and unsuccessful if this condition is not met
within 15 seconds of ﬁnding a capture location.
C. Success Rate
An example capture sequence is shown in Fig. 5. The
system was able to retrieve the foreign body in 86.4% of
attempts, including those based on spatial probability (14/17)
and dwell time (5/5). Failed captures (13.6%) were due
to the foreign body shifting after a capture location had
been identiﬁed, but before the robot could reach it. This
suggests that even a straightforward adjustment strategy, such
as manual reset, can improve success rate. The 86.4% success
rate for single-shot trials is thus encouraging.
Inspired by these ﬁndings, efforts on automatic reposi-
tioning are in progress. The ﬁrst attempt uses the 15-second
threshold to decide failure, but more advanced metrics such
as expected waiting times may be used in the future. Prelim-
inary ﬁndings suggest that 100% success is plausible.
D. Execution Times
Table I lists retrieval times broken down by phase. During
observation, the system passively tracks the foreign body to
compute a capture location. Because heart surgery can last
several hours, an average observation time of 35.2 seconds
suggests that more time can be afforded to improve results.
TABLE I
FOREIGN BODY RETRIEVAL EXECUTION TIMES (SECONDS)
Type of Capture Location Used
Phase Probability Dwell Time Overall
Observation 29.6 6.9 54.3 33.1 35.2 18.9
Insertion 2.8 0.3 3.1 0.5 2.9 0.4
Waiting 3.7 2.0 2.2 1.5 3.3 1.9
Total
1
97.7 21.6 124.5 68.4 103.8 37.1
1
Includes retraction time
The insertion phase encapsulates the travel time of the
robot, which was relatively consistent at 2.9 seconds through-
out the experiments. The motion was slow enough to be
monitored in the ultrasound stream, but not so much as to
profoundly affect procedure times.
Upon reaching a capture location, the robot may need to
wait for the foreign body to return; this waiting phase was
found to last 3.3 seconds on average. It is possible that the
foreign body will chance into capture after a sufﬁciently long
wait. However, in placing the robot in non-capture locations,
we did not observe such an event over runs of 4:44, 4:30, and
5:05 minutes. Such wait times may be difﬁcult to tolerate,
especially with a time-sensitive device such as suction.
The total times (Table I, bottom row) vary widely because
retraction was commanded through user input. Nevertheless,
retrieval times of 2–3 minutes provide a rough estimate of the
duration of the robotic part of the procedure. Observation and
waiting times exhibit large variances as well, in agreement
4872
Fig. 5. Foreign body capture sequence. (a) Foreign body (circle) in the heart phantom. (b) Robot (arrow) approaches capture location. (c) Robot captures
foreign body. (d) Robot leaves heart with foreign body. (e) Heart empty after foreign body is extracted.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
3D Foreign Body Position in Robotic Retrieval
Elapsed Time (s)
FB Position (mm)
Insert Observe
Insertion
Complete
Foreign Body
Captured
Capture Location
Computed
Wait
Fig. 6. Example three-axis foreign body motion trace during retrieval, with
observation, insertion, and waiting phases annotated.
with previous studies. The variabilities can be attributed to
the irregular path of the foreign body, and its tendency to get
stuck on occasion, either in a transient pattern of motion or in
some area of the heart chamber. Fig. 6 highlights the irregular
motion of the foreign body during an example attempt.
E. Comparison of Capture Locations
There was an average distance of 9.1 mm between
probability- and dwell time-derived capture locations. We
noted this phenomenon previously [10], but the degree of
difference is tied to present conditions. For example, in
the trivial case in which the foreign body is immobilized,
all methods of computing a capture location should be in
agreement.
Capture locations based on probability manifested over
a range of 8.2 mm, while for dwell time locations this
range was 11.7 mm—respectively 22.1% and 31.5% of the
average extent of travel (37.1 mm) along the dominant axis.
Observation times for probability were lower than for dwell
time, with less deviation (Table I, ﬁrst row). There is apparent
variability in the dwell time metric, which is more sensitive
to particular trajectories. However, waiting times for dwell
time were lower and less varying (Table I, third row), hinting
at a tradeoff between the stability of computing a capture
location and of capturing the foreign body there. Thus the
preferred method may depend on circumstance. It is also
possible that all methods are adequate to the task, especially
when readjustment strategies are included.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
The adverse symptoms of foreign bodies in the heart must
be weighed against the risks of conventional treatment, often
a highly invasive surgery. In an effort to improve the state of
care, we propose a 3D ultrasound-guided, dexterous robotic
system to help surgeons detect and remove foreign bodies
from a beating heart in a minimally invasive manner.
In previous work, tracking of a foreign body in a beating
heart phantom using streaming 3D TEE was performed. The
motion was found to be fast and erratic, and straightforward
pursuit using a non-dexterous robot proved difﬁcult. When
observed over time, however, distinct tendencies in the
motion emerged, offering the possibility of using a slow,
dexterous robot to ambush the target at carefully planned
capture locations.
In this paper, we introduce a high dexterity robot to test
the aforementioned hypothesis. Results of real-time experi-
ments demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed system and
approach. With robotic aspects incurring perioperative times
on the order of a few minutes, additional observation time
can potentially increase robustness and reliability.
We demonstrated near-autonomous capability, but support
for a spectrum of cooperative control is a possible future
direction. Future work will also address virtual ﬁxtures for
protecting heart tissues. Handling different types and mul-
tiple foreign bodies are important future tasks. For clinical
use, possible future work includes workﬂow optimization,
sterility, capture mechanisms for different types of foreign
bodies, and X-ray integration.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank E. Radulescu for insights on ultrasound
technology, D. Stanton for support of the heart phantom, and
V . Parthasarathy for assistance with the ultrasound equip-
ment. We also thank H. Sen for work on the robot software
and I. Iordachita for advice on mechanical components. For
their help in the assembly of the snake robot, we thank N.
Simaan, K. Xu, and W. Wei.
REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Marshall, N. J. Ring, and P. L. Newman, “An unexplained foreign
body in the myocardium,” J. Royal Society of Medicine, vol. 95, no. 5,
pp. 250–251, May 2002.
[2] P. N. Symbas, A. L. Picone, C. R. Hatcher, and S. E. Vlasis-Hale,
“Cardiac missiles. A review of the literature and personal experience,”
Annals of Surgery, vol. 211, no. 5, pp. 639–47; discussion 647–8, May
1990.
4873
[3] Borden Institute, “Ch. 16: Thoracic Injuries,” in Emergency War
Surgery: Third United States Revision, A. C. Szul, L. B. Davis, B. G.
Maston, D. Wise, L. R. Sparacino, and J. Shull, Eds. United States
Dept. of Defense, 2004, ch. 16, pp. 1–16.
[4] J. C. Williams and W. C. Elkington, “Slow progressing cardiac
complications—a case report,” J. Chiropractic Medicine, vol. 7, no. 1,
pp. 28–33, Mar. 2008.
[5] G. M. Actis Dato, A. Arslanian, P. Di Marzio, P. L. Filosso, and
E. Rufﬁni, “Posttraumatic and iatrogenic foreign bodies in the heart:
report of fourteen cases and review of the literature,” J. Thoracic and
Cardiovascular Surgery, vol. 126, no. 2, pp. 408–14, Aug. 2003.
[6] J. Evans, L. A. Gray, A. Rayner, and R. L. Fulton, “Principles for the
management of penetrating cardiac wounds,” Annals of Surgery, vol.
189, no. 6, pp. 777–84, June 1979.
[7] Borden Institute, “Ch. 4: Thoracic Trauma,” in War Surgery in
Afghanistan and Iraq: A Series of Cases, 2003-2007, S. C. Nessen,
D. E. Lounsbury, and S. P. Hetz, Eds. United States Dept. of Defense,
2008, ch. 4, pp. 118–156.
[8] P. Thienphrapa, H. Elhawary, B. Ramachandran, D. Stanton, and
A. Popovic, “Tracking and characterization of fragments in a beating
heart using 3D ultrasound for interventional guidance,” in Int. Conf.
on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention
(MICCAI), Sept. 2011, pp. 211–218.
[9] P. Thienphrapa, B. Ramachandran, R. H. Taylor, and A. Popovic, “A
system for 3D ultrasound-guided robotic retrieval of foreign bodies
from a beating heart,” in IEEE RAS/EMBS Int. Conf. on Biomedical
Robotics and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 2012, pp. 743–748.
[10] P. Thienphrapa, B. Ramachandran, H. Elhawary, R. H. Taylor, and
A. Popovic, “Multiple capture locations for 3D ultrasound-guided
robotic retrieval of moving bodies from a beating heart,” in SPIE
Medical Imaging, vol. 8316, Feb. 2012, p. 831619.
[11] P. Thienphrapa, A. Popovic, and R. H. Taylor, “3D ultrasound-guided
retrieval of foreign bodies from a beating heart using a dexterous
surgical robot,” in Hamlyn Symposium on Medical Robotics, 2013.
[12] J. Stoll, P. Novotny, R. Howe, and P. Dupont, “Real-time 3D
ultrasound-based servoing of a surgical instrument,” in IEEE Int. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2006, pp. 613–618.
[13] P. Novotny, J. Stoll, P. Dupont, and R. Howe, “Real-time visual
servoing of a robot using three-dimensional ultrasound,” in IEEE Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2007, pp. 2655–
2660.
[14] K. Liang, D. V . Allmen, A. J. Rogers, E. D. Light, and S. W. Smith,
“Three-dimensional ultrasound guidance of autonomous robotic breast
biopsy: feasibility study,” Ultrasound in Medicine & Biology, vol. 36,
no. 1, pp. 173–7, 2010.
[15] S. G. Yuen, D. T. Kettler, P. M. Novotny, R. D. Plowes, and R. D.
Howe, “Robotic motion compensation for beating heart intracardiac
surgery,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1355–1372,
May 2009.
[16] S. Kesner, S. Yuen, and R. Howe, “Ultrasound servoing of catheters
for beating heart valve repair,” in Information Processing in Computer-
Assisted Interventions (IPCAI), N. Navab and P. Jannin, Eds. Geneva,
Switzerland: Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 168–178.
[17] A. Krupa, G. Fichtinger, and G. D. Hager, “Real-time motion sta-
bilization with B-mode ultrasound using image speckle information
and visual servoing,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 28, no. 10, pp.
1334–1354, Oct. 2009.
[18] R. Mebarki, A. Krupa, and F. Chaumette, “Modeling and 3D local
estimation for in-plane and out-of-plane motion guidance by 2D
ultrasound-based visual servoing,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2009, pp. 319–325.
[19] M.-A. Vitrani, H. Mitterhofer, N. Bonnet, and G. Morel, “Ro-
bust ultrasound-based visual servoing for beating heart intracardiac
surgery,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
vol. 13, no. 5. IEEE, 2007, pp. 3021–3027.
[20] M. Sauvee, P. Poignet, and E. Dombre, “Ultrasound image-based
visual servoing of a surgical instrument through nonlinear model
predictive control,” Int. J. Robotics Research, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 25–40,
Jan. 2008.
[21] P. Abolmaesumi, S. Salcudean, W. Zhu, M. Sirouspour, and S. DiMaio,
“Image-guided control of a robot for medical ultrasound,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 11–23,
2002.
[22] E. Boctor, G. Fischer, M. Choti, G. Fichtinger, and R. H. Taylor, “A
dual-armed robotic system for intraoperative ultrasound guided hepatic
ablative therapy: a prospective study,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), vol. 3. IEEE, 2004, pp. 2517–2522.
[23] A. Rogers, E. Light, and S. Smith, “3-D ultrasound guidance of
autonomous robot for location of ferrous shrapnel,” IEEE Transactions
on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control, vol. 56, no. 7,
pp. 1301–3, 2009.
[24] M. Fronheiser, S. Idriss, P. Wolf, and S. Smith, “Vibrating inter-
ventional device detection using real-time 3-D color Doppler,” IEEE
Transactions on Ultrasonics, Ferroelectrics, and Frequency Control,
vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 1355–62, 2008.
[25] J. T. Moore, M. W. A. Chu, B. Kiaii, D. Bainbridge, G. Guiraudon,
C. Wedlake, M. Currie, M. Rajchl, R. V . Patel, and T. M. Peters, “A
navigation platform for guidance of beating heart transapical mitral
valve repair,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 60,
no. 4, pp. 1034–40, Apr. 2013.
[26] A. H. Gosline, N. V . Vasilyev, E. J. Butler, C. Folk, A. Cohen, R. Chen,
N. Lang, P. J. del Nido, and P. E. Dupont, “Percutaneous intracardiac
beating-heart surgery using metal MEMS tissue approximation tools,”
Int. J. Robotics Research, pp. 1081–1093, May 2012.
[27] B. Ramachandran, P. Thienphrapa, A. Jain, and A. Popovic, “Tracking
using 3D ultrasound for guiding cardiac interventions,” in Int. Conf.
on Biomedical Engineering, 2011.
[28] K. L. Ryan, W. H. Cooke, C. A. Rickards, K. G. Lurie, and V . A. Con-
vertino, “Breathing through an inspiratory threshold device improves
stroke volume during central hypovolemia in humans,” J. Applied
Physiol. (Bethesda, Md. 1985), vol. 104, no. 5, pp. 1402–9, May 2008.
[29] J. B. Kostis, E. Mavrogeorgis, A. Slater, and S. Bellet, “Use of
a range-gated, pulsed ultrasonic Doppler technique for continuous
measurement of velocity of the posterior heart wall,” Chest, vol. 62,
no. 5, p. 597, Nov. 1972.
[30] N. Simaan, R. H. Taylor, and P. Flint, “A dexterous system for
laryngeal surgery,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). IEEE, 2004, pp. 351–357.
[31] A. Kapoor, N. Simaan, and P. Kazanzides, “A system for speed and
torque control of DC motors with application to small snake robots,”
in IEEE Int. Conf. on Mechatronics and Robotics (MechRob), 2004.
[32] N. Simaan, R. H. Taylor, and P. Flint, “High dexterity snake-like
robotic slaves for minimally invasive telesurgery of the upper airway,”
in Int. Conf. on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted
Intervention (MICCAI), ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science,
C. Barillot, D. Haynor, and P. Hellier, Eds., vol. 3217. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, pp. 17–24.
[33] A. Kapoor, “Motion constrained control of robots for dexterous
surgical tasks,” Ph.D. dissertation, Johns Hopkins Univ., Sept. 2007.
[Online]. Available: http://search.proquest.com/docview/304616212
[34] N. Simaan, K. Xu, W. Wei, A. Kapoor, P. Kazanzides, R. H. Taylor,
and P. Flint, “Design and integration of a telerobotic system for
minimally invasive surgery of the throat,” Int. J. Robotics Research,
vol. 28, no. 9, pp. 1134–1153, 2009.
[35] R. H. Taylor, J. Funda, B. Eldridge, S. Gomory, K. Gruben, D. LaRose,
M. Talamini, L. Kavoussi, and J. Anderson, “A telerobotic assistant
for laparoscopic surgery,” IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Magazine, vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 279–288, 1995.
[36] P. Thienphrapa and P. Kazanzides, “Design of a scalable real-time
robot controller and application to a dexterous manipulator,” in IEEE
Int. Conf. on Robot. and Biomimetics (ROBIO), 2011, pp. 2295–2300.
[37] J. Funda, R. H. Taylor, B. Eldridge, S. Gomory, and K. Gruben, “Con-
strained Cartesian motion control for teleoperated surgical robots,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation, vol. 12, no. 3, pp.
453–465, June 1996.
[38] A. Kapoor, M. Li, and R. H. Taylor, “Constrained control for surgical
assistant robots,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2006, pp. 231–236.
[39] P. Thienphrapa, B. Ramachandran, H. Elhawary, A. Popovic, and R. H.
Taylor, “Intraoperative analysis of locations for 3D ultrasound-guided
capture of foreign bodies from a beating heart,” in Hamlyn Symposium
on Medical Robotics, 2012.
4874
