  
  
Abstract— The proposed research effort explores the 
development of active cells - simple contractile electro-
mechanical units that can be used as the material basis for 
larger articulable structures. Each cell, which might be 
considered a “muscle unit”, consists of a contractile Nitinol 
SMA core with conductive terminals. Large numbers of these 
cells might be combined and externally powered to change 
phase, contracting to either articulate with a large strain or 
increase the stiffness of the ensemble, depending on the cell 
design. Unlike traditional work in modular robotics, the 
approach presented here focuses on cells that have a simplistic 
design and function, are inexpensive to fabricate, and are 
eventually scalable to sub-millimeter sizes, working towards 
our vision of robot structures that can be custom-fabricated 
from large numbers of general cell units, similar to biological 
structures.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The focus of this paper is a class of cellular robotics that 
are differentiated from existing work in re-configurable and 
self-replicating robotics by the simplicity of the cells and 
their ability to scale in terms of size of construction and 
method of actuation. These cells (shown in Fig. 1) are 
intentionally simplistic in their design and construction such 
that they are easy to fabricate (with a very small number of 
parts) and also hold the promise that the principle concept 
can be scaled to be much smaller in size (eventually sub-
millimeter scale). The long-term goal of the project is the 
development of electromechanical composite materials made 
of a large number of tiny contractile engineered cells that 
serve as the building blocks for larger articulated or variable-
stiffness structures (e.g. Fig. 2). This cell-based approach, 
which has been largely overlooked in engineered systems, is 
ubiquitous in biology - groups of similar cells form tissues, 
groups of tissues form organs, and groups of organs form 
complex organisms. 
There has been a fairly large amount of research in 
modular and reconfigurable robots, the majority of which 
rely on “units” that are self-contained robots themselves, 
 
Research supported by United States Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research under Grant #FA9550-11-1-0093. 
J. P. Swensen, A.I. Nawroj, and A.M. Dollar are with the Department of 
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New 
Haven, CT 06511 USA (phone: 203-432-3195; fax: 203-432-6775; e-mail: 
john.swensen; ahsan.nawroj; aaron.dollar@yale.edu). 
P.E.I. Pounds is with the School of Information Technology and 
Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland, Australia (e-mail: 
paul.pounds@uq.edu.au).  
  
 
complete with their own suite of actuators (generally for 
mobility), sensors, and control electronics, resulting in a 
system with fundamental lower limits on the sizes that can be 
achieved. Alternatively, we are working towards a much 
simpler concept of electromechanical units that we call 
‘active cells’, inspired by biological systems where 
essentially all multicellular organisms are comprised of 
specialized cells which together form complex systems. As a 
specific example where many similar specialized cells are co-
located, the human heart is comprised of only two active cell 
types (myocardiocytes and cardiac pacemaker cells) within 
the extracellular matrix [1], with skeletal muscle generally 
comprised of a single myocyte type within an extracellular 
matrix.  
In previous work, we studied the design of the conductive 
surfaces of contractile cells utilized in large groups to create 
large conductive structures [2], as well as experimentally 
demonstrating purely conductive structures consisting of 
hundreds of cells with passive cell-to-cell contacts [3]. In this 
paper, we extend that work by exploring the development of 
the contractile aspect of the cell, investigating the 
implementation of active material actuator elements (Nitinol 
Shape Memory Alloy (SMA)) and antagonist passive springs, 
implemented in modular cell blocks that are reconfigurable. 
While Nitinol has limitations in terms of thermodynamic 
inefficiencies and achievable bandwidth, it has better 
achievable strain and is more durable than other material 
actuators [4]. Material actuators are generally desirable due to 
their potential to be utilized at very small scale, simple 
powering schemes (through Joule heating for Nitinol), and 
lack of required complicated complementary structures (in 
Simple, Scalable Active Cells for Articulated Robot Structures 
John P. Swensen, Member, IEEE, Ahsan I. Nawroj, Student Member, IEEE, Paul E. I. Pounds, 
Member, IEEE, and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE 
 
Fig 1. The repeatable motion of an active cell through ohmic heating of 
the Nitinol shape-memory alloy (SMA). 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1241
  
 
Fig. 2. Potential applications – muscle contraction in the heart and arm (left and left-center), peristaltic locomotion in earthworms 
(right-center), and whole aircraft deformation (right).  
 
contrast to common Lorentz force actuators, for example, 
which generally require bearings, magnets, and a physical or 
electronic means of commutation between coils). As with the 
biological muscle cells, these simple and largely 
homogeneous cells are simultaneously structural and 
contractile, but unlike most modular robots, are neither self-
assembling nor self-reconfiguring.  
Nearly all existing approaches to modular robots can be 
classified as either being very general purpose (with the 
necessary attendant complexity) or simple but mostly passive 
components. In terms of the former, there have been a 
number of very impressive projects involving highly capable 
general purpose modular robots, including CKBots [5] and 
SMORES [6]. Additionally, much of the theoretical 
consideration for modular and cellular robotics was presented 
by Fukuda and Ueyama [7], which parlays into the expanding 
field of cooperative and distributed robotics (e.g. [8], [9]). 
Thorough reviews of the work in the area prior to 2009 are 
found in [10], [11].  
On the spectrum of the simpler modular robot projects, 
roBlocks [12] (later commercialized as Cubelets by Modular 
Robotics LLC), are single-function blocks but are not 
particularly simple in terms of design. A related approach to 
simple, crystalline based robots that achieved volume change 
through linear actuators in all directions was developed by 
Rus and Vona [13]. Recent example of simple modules that 
are mostly passive, e.g. they only deal with latching and 
unlatching, are given by Moses and Chirikjian [14], Gilpin et 
al. [15], and Tolley et al. [16]. Perhaps the most impressive 
more general purpose modular robot to date is called Milli-
Moteins [17] – this seems to be the first effort that has 
achieved scales on the order of 1cm per module and has 
actuation, rather than just latching. 
Unlike those and other related work, we are working 
towards very simple modular “cells” that are both structural 
and contractile, with an eye towards eventual miniaturization 
and easy mass-production. We begin this paper with a 
description of the design of the nitinol-based contractile 
element of the cell (section II), followed by a description of 
the design of the mechanical cell housing and electrical 
interconnects (section III). Next we present a proof-of-
concept experimental demonstration of a small group of cells, 
arranged as a linear chain performing a peristaltic-like 
locomotion pattern (section IV). We finish with a discussion 
of the contributions and limitations of the current approach 
and identify the next steps for future work (section V).  
II. CELL CONTRACTILE ELEMENT 
The choice of shape-memory alloy Nitinol as the primary 
method of actuation, coupled with the goal of a minimalist 
approach to engineering the structure of the active cells, sets 
forth specific design challenges. Nitinol has fundamental 
limitation in terms of thermodynamic efficiency [18], 
however efforts to miniaturize [19], [20], [21] and give 
microstructure [22], [23], [24] to Nitinol makes it a feasible 
method of actuation for scaling, as opposed to magnetic or 
electrostatic actuation methods which have fundamental 
challenges at very small scales. The choice of Nitinol also 
drives many of the design decisions such as the mechanical 
design of the cell, spring selection for a return force for the 
one-way SMA spring coils, and cell interconnects and 
mating, which are addressed in the following. 
A. Shape memory alloy – Nitinol  
The desired eventual scale of the actuator cells (< 10 mm) 
places strict limits on the complexity of the actuation 
mechanism, making an active-material actuator attractive (as 
opposed to a small electric motor, for instance). Our current 
concept exploits the shape memory effect of Nickel 
Titanium (NiTi) Shape Memory Alloys (SMA). SMAs have 
the distinct advantage of being highly compact and requiring 
little overhead in terms of drive electronics. The direct 
electrical interfacing and ease of integration makes them 
apropos for this application. NiTi, the most widely-available 
SMA can develop high stresses (approx. 100 MPa in the 
martensitic phase and 560 MPa in the austenitic phase) in 
wires of less than 0.5 mm thickness [25]. Conversely, many 
other active material actuators, such as electro-active 
polymers and piezoelectric cells, allow either limited 
stresses or very low achievable strains, making them less 
suitable. NiTi is durable, inexpensive, and can achieve large 
strains when heated. 
NiTi shape memory alloys have their own inherent 
limitations, however. The mechanism by which they actuate 
stems from a phase change phenomenon in which the 
crystalline lattice of the metal transitions from austenitic 
structure to martensitic structure on cooling.  Heating causes 
the crystalline domains to transition to the more compact 
1242
  
 
Fig. 4. Bonding Nitinol coil to copper electrode through a pot-solder 
technique in copper tubing. Left: completed electrode and Right: tube 
and coil read for bonding. 
austenitic lattice form, inducing a strain in the material. In 
commercial NiTi SMAs, this strain is currently limited to 
approximately 4% for straight drawn wire in tension for 
repeatable, non-deteriorating cycling of the shape memory 
effect. Additionally, SMA is a unidirectional actuator – an 
external restoring stress must be applied to strain it to its 
detwinned state. The SMA must then be heated to revert 
back the more-dense austenitic lattice (see Fig. 3). Despite 
these limitations, however, we believe it is the most 
reasonable option for the proposed work because it provides 
the potential for miniaturization (though the engineering 
challenges of miniaturization are not addressed in this 
paper). 
Another engineering challenge with using Nitinol is 
creating reliable electrical and mechanical connections [26]. 
Nitinol forms a thick oxide layer that makes it difficult to 
create reliable connections with basic solders. Designers 
often resort to a combination of either abrasives or etchant, 
specialized fluxes (like Indalloy Flux #2 or #3, Indium 
Corporation, 2013), and subsequent soldering to make a 
strong mechanical and electrical connection. Another 
common solution is a mechanical crimp that scrapes and 
penetrates the oxide layer to provide the connection. 
In our design, we create our own custom Nitinol coils 
(shown as the black “springs” on the outside of the cells in 
Fig. 1) by creating a close winding of 0.3 mm diameter 
Flexinol wire around 1 mm diameter music wire. By making 
coils, rather than using the manufacturer provided straight 
drawn wire, we are able to trade off the stress and strain 
capabilities of the Nitinol. The memory shape was set by 
fixing the ends of the Nitinol onto the music wire, heating 
with a butane torch, and quenching in cold water. Though 
using a torch to bring the Nitinol to a temperature through 
visual inspection of color change is much less precise than 
other techniques involving highly controlled ovens, this 
method did provide the ability to easily create long lengths 
of coil and we still achieved high repeatability in spring 
properties across batches of coils (see section II.B. for a 
discussion of return spring optimization). 
We cut the coil to the appropriate length, leaving 4 extra 
loops at each end of the length, and pot solder the Nitinol 
inside a small piece of copper tubing as shown in Fig. 4. 
This method is advantageous because the Nitinol coil exits 
the terminal at an angle consistent with the spring pitch and 
helps avoid stress concentration and permanent plastic 
deformation from occurring near the terminals. 
B. Bias/Return spring selection 
One of the most critical aspects of the active cell design is 
choosing a bias/return spring that maximizes the recoverable 
strain of the cell. Most designs have relied upon tension 
spring for the return spring. Here, we chose to do a spring 
that is in parallel with the Nitinol springs to make the design 
more compact and approximately a cube when in the 
compressed state. This choice had two effects: (1) the 
diameter of the return spring coils need to be fairly large 
compared to the length of the return spring and (2) we had to 
find a spring manufacturer that made appropriately designed 
springs. Because the spring is in parallel with the Nitinol 
coils, this becomes a problem of first identifying the force 
displacement curves for our Nitinol coils for both the 
austenitic and martensitic phases, then choosing a spring with 
a force displacement profile such that the equilibrium 
positions maximize the cell displacement.  
Fig. 5 illustrates the process of finding a bias spring that 
provides the maximum recoverable strain of the active cell. 
Ideally, one would use a constant force spring with 
magnitude near the point where unrecoverable plastic 
deformation begins to occur while in the Martensitic phase. 
However, constant force springs on the scale of the active 
cells described in this paper (and even smaller moving 
forward) are not readily available. The next best spring 
selection then becomes the spring with the longest rest length 
and spring constant requisite to intersect the Martensitic force 
displacement curve near the point where unrecoverable 
plastic deformation begins. An important consideration when 
choosing springs is the spring buckling thresholds, which will 
determine the maximum rest length achievable as a function 
of both the spring diameter and the amount of compression 
that will occur. 
In this design, the Nitinol springs will always be acting as 
tension spring, whereas the return spring will always be in 
compression. In Fig. 5 (top) we see that given a phase state 
of the Nitinol coils, the length of the coil will be determined 
by the static equilibrium between the bias spring and the 
Nitinol coils. The extremes of these static equilibria are 
represented in Fig. 5 (bottom) by the points where the linear 
spring force displacement line crosses the Austenitic and 
Martensitic force displacement curves. The recoverable 
strain of the active cell will be determined by the total travel 
 
Fig. 3. Nitinol SMA activation cycle  
1243
  
between the equilibrium points for the cold (Martensitic) and 
hot (Austenitic) configurations. In the experiments described 
later, we operate the Nitinol coils by transitioning between 
the fully-Martensitic and fully-Austenitic phases, but more 
precise control can be achieved by characterizing the Nitinol 
actuation hysteresis and controlling the volume fraction of 
Martensite and Austenite in the coils. 
III. CELL STRUCTURE 
A. Mechanical Structure 
The goal is to provide a structural framework that is as 
simple as possible that also provides (1) physical structure to 
each cell and (2) provides electrical and mechanical 
connection points between adjacent cells. The preliminary 
design, shown in Fig. 6, is characterized by a low number of 
parts, a single pre-assembly step, and straightforward final 
assembly. Each cell is made up only of two Nitinol coils, two 
pass-through wires, two telescoping brass tubes, a bias 
spring, a pair of magnets, and a pair of inner and outer end 
caps. The ends of the Nitinol coils and the pass-through wires 
are prepared as shown in Fig. 4, such that the pot soldered 
copper tubing serves as both the electrical connection 
between cells and the mechanical connection within the cell. 
Each end cap is composed of an inner and outer piece. The 
inner pieces are attached to the telescoping tubes and have 
channels for the pass-through wires to be routed through the 
center of the tubes. The inner end cap also has an alignment 
feature to keep the bias spring centered within the telescoping 
tubes. The magnet is glued to the outer end cap with 
cyanoacrylate and the pass through wires are attached to the 
end cap via press fit and the inner and outer end caps are 
fitted together. The final step is to manually compress the 
entire cell and insert the Nitinol coils into the press fit 
features on opposing corners of the cell.  
Herein, the parts have been made with a 3D printer to 
facilitate rapid iteration and modification in the early stages 
of this effort. However, all of the parts could have easily been 
constructed as molded (hard polyurethane) or machined 
(Nylon or PTFE) pieces, which include the tubes that 
constrain the motion to a single degree of freedom. Here we 
used telescoping brass tubes that are manufactured to be used 
as close fitting bearing surfaces. 
Nitinol formed as extensions springs with the memory 
shape set to the fully compressed configuration is a 
unidirectional actuator. Ohmic heating of the Nitinol and the 
transition to the Austenitic lattice will return the coil to the 
fully compressed configuration. But subsequent cooling does 
not generally alter the shape of the Nitinol spring, barring the 
use of two-way shape memory effect (TWSME). The 
TWSME involves a fairly complicated training process and 
one of the directions of the two-way effect tends to degrade 
fairly quickly over repeated cycling [18]. For this reason, we 
utilize the one-way shape memory effect and choose a 
 
 
Fig. 6. An exploded view of the assembly of an active cell (left) and a 
fully assembled cell (right). Each Nitinol coil and pass-through wire, 
with their copper terminals, are prepared previously to assembly. Then, 
the brass tubing is attached to the inner end cap piece and the magnets 
are attached to the outer end cap piece with CA glue. The final step is 
simple assembly of the constituent pieces.  
 
Fig. 5. Choosing the return spring for parallel spring configuration. The 
Austenite and Martensite stiffness curves (bottom) represent 3 different 
Nitinol pieces created in two different batches of forming and 
annealing. Spring properties were consistent despite crude annealing 
techniques. 
TABLE I. ACTIVE CELL MECHANICAL PROPERTIES 
Property Value 
Active cell mass 17.775 +/- 0.548 g 
Maximum tensile force  20.65 N 
Uncontracted length 40.64 mm 
Contracted length 30.48 mm 
Tensile stiffness (martensitic 
Nitinol coils) 
0.53 N/mm 
Tensile stiffness (austenitic 
Nitiniol coils) 
3.61 N/mm 
Compressive stiffness 0.11 N/mm 
 
1244
  
bias/return spring to extend the cell upon cooling. A 
characterization of the mechanical characteristic of each cell 
is given in Table I. There are some variation in the 
uncontracted and contracted length based on slight variations 
in the length of the Nitinol coils and lengths of the brass 
tubes, where the table gives average values. 
B. Cell interconnects, power distribution, and control 
Each end cap contains four of the pot-soldered terminals, 
two for the pass-through connections and two for the Nitinol 
connections. A magnet attached to the outer face of each end 
cap draws the four terminals of two adjacent cells together. 
The two pass-through terminals on each end are spring 
loaded to prevent the case where manufacturing inaccuracies 
would prevent four planar contacts from being made 
robustly. Because of the 4 conductive pathways through each 
cell, we are able to create simple circuits for the ohmic 
heating of the Nitinol coils.  
For the experiments shown later, we create two channels 
where an end cap connects the conductive pathways that are 
on opposite corners of the cells, as shown in Fig. 7. In this 
manner, we are able to set up cyclic patterns for the 
activation and relaxation of the active cells. Cells could be 
created with a single conductive pathway, but the choice of 
multiple pathways added additional functionality with 
minimal added complexity. Other measures of minimal 
added complexity could involve simple passive electronics 
that makes the activation of active cells dependent on the 
direction of current flow or the frequency of electrical 
oscillation. This could allow the “addressing” of individual 
cells despite the single pathway and without the need from 
microcontrollers or localized intelligence. 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL IMPLEMENTATION OF GROUPS OF CELLS 
A simple experimental implementation was set up to 
demonstrate the function of the cells and the performance of 
ensembles of active cells. Four cells were fabricated, each 
approximately 2.5 cm long when contracted. The cells are 
arranged in a line, with the magnetic end-caps providing an 
intrinsic polarity and alignment to the structure (Fig. 8).  
The microcontroller (PIC16F690) switched power to cell 
network for a period of time (2s), allowing the cells to 
contract fully, and then turned it off for 4s, allowing the cells 
to relax (Fig. 8). Power MOSFETs (IRF540) provided the 
necessary current (1A) to the network of cells when the 
microcontroller directed. The current input to the system as 
well as the position of the head of the robot is shown on Fig. 
9. 
Since actuation of the active cells is from the shape 
memory effect, and the contraction of Nitinol alone would 
not cause a motion necessary to move the chain of cells 
forward, it is necessary to introduce an asymmetry in the 
cells’ contact with the ground. In this manner, a contraction 
of the cells will cause motion in a single forward direction.. 
To achieve this, a small metallic bristle was added to the end 
caps of the cells, all aligned in one direction when the cells 
are assembled end-to-end. This bristle provides an 
anisotropic frictional contact with the ground [27], allowing 
the group to inch forward in a peristalsis-like locomotion 
[28] thus the entire motion occurs in the direction allowed by 
the bristle. Overall, this setup causes the group of four cells 
to contract and relax, all in one direction because of their 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Fig. 8. Linear chain of four cells, demonstrating successful electrical 
connections. Example showing “peristalsis-like” locomotion.  
 
 
Fig. 7. An illustration of the controller and conductive pathway for a 
linearly connected group of cells. 
 
 
Fig. 9. The switched current input to the system (top) and the position of 
the head of the robot (bottom) during the course of two successive motion 
cycles. 
1245
  
aligned bristles in contact with the ground (made of a rough 
foam to increase friction). The group of cells forming this 
modular robot thus moves like an earthworm steadily 
forward. 
The motile performance of the setup is evaluated simply 
as the rate of motion of the front (head) of the robot, and this 
was observed to be approximately 60mm/min (about 6.5mm 
motion forward in each full contraction and relaxation 
stroke). Although our experimental setup used direct 
powering of the cells, it is possible to optimize the use of the 
two power channels to provide faster locomotion.  
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented the design and prototype of a 
“active cell” modular robot that is both load bearing and 
contractile. Unlike traditional modular robotics, the 
approach presented here focuses on cells that have a 
simplistic design and function, are inexpensive to fabricate, 
and are eventually scalable to sub-millimeter sizes. By using 
shape-memory alloy (SMA) with a minimum amount of 
engineered structure necessary to provide cell-to-cell 
transmission of power and control, the approach works 
towards our vision of robot structures that can be custom-
fabricated from large numbers of general cell units, similar 
to biological structures.  
There are a number of immediate directions for future 
work on the topics presented in this paper. The current cell 
design, while showing a large repeatable strain and having 
the desired level of mechanical simplicity, requires the 
connector caps of the cells will be modified in order to allow 
for lateral connections in addition to the linear connections, 
allowing truly three-dimensional structures to be built. 
Eventually, as in more complex biological systems, where a 
number of specialized cell types combine to make complex 
multicellular organisms, we intend to create additional types 
of active cells with complementary functions. Sensor cells 
that respond to external stimuli, as well as controller cells 
that modulate signals as they are transmitted will be created, 
as well as additional actuator cells that provide other simple 
single degree of freedom motions, such as shear or bending. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Pelouch, I. M. C. Dixon, L. Golfman, R. E. Beamish, and N. S. 
Dhalla, “Role of extracellular matrix proteins in heart function,” 
Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, vol. 129, no. 2, pp. 101–
120, 1993. 
[2] J. P. Swensen and A. M. Dollar, “The connectedness of packed 
circles and spheres with application to conductive cellular 
materials,” PLoS One. 
[3] A. I. Nawroj, J. P. Swensen, and A. M. Dollar, “A Bulk 
Conductive Polymer Using Embedded Macroscopic Copper 
Cells,” in Proceedings of the ASME conference on smart 
materials, adaptive structures and intelligent systems (SMASIS), 
2013. 
[4] a R. Pelton, V. Schroeder, M. R. Mitchell, X.-Y. Gong, M. 
Barney, and S. W. Robertson, “Fatigue and durability of Nitinol 
stents.,” Journal of the mechanical behavior of biomedical 
materials, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 153–64, Apr. 2008. 
[5] M. Park, S. Chitta, A. Teichman, and M. Yim, “Automatic 
Configuration Recognition Methods in Modular Robots,” The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 27, no. 3–4, pp. 
403–421, Mar. 2008. 
[6] J. Davey, N. Kwok, and M. Yim, “Emulating self-reconfigurable 
robots - design of the SMORES system,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 
2012, pp. 4464–4469. 
[7] T. Fukuda and T. Ueyama, Cellular robotics and micro robotic 
systems, vol. 10. World Scientific. 
[8] M. Wooldridge, An introduction to multiagent systems. Wiley, 
2008. 
[9] J. C. Barca and Y. A. Sekercioglu, “Swarm robotics reviewed,” 
Robotica, vol. 31, no. 03, pp. 345–359, Jul. 2012. 
[10] M. Yim, P. J. White, M. Park, and J. Sastra, “Modular Self-
Reconfigurable Robots,” in in Encyclopedia of Complexity and 
Systems Science, 2009, pp. 5618–5631. 
[11] M. Yim, W. Shen, B. Salemi, D. Rus, M. Moll, H. Lipson, E. 
Klavins, and G. Chirikjian, “Modular Self-Reconfigurable Robot 
Systems [Grand Challenges of Robotics],” IEEE Robotics & 
Automation Magazine, vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 43–52, Mar. 2007. 
[12] E. Schweikardt and M. D. Gross, “Experiments in design 
synthesis when behavior is determined by shape,” Personal and 
Ubiquitous Computing, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 123–132, Aug. 2010. 
[13] D. Rus and M. Vona, “Crystalline Robots: Self-Reconfiguration 
with Compressible Unit Modules,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 10, 
no. 1, pp. 107–124, Jan. 2001. 
[14] M. Moses, H. Yamaguchi, and G. S. Chirikjian, “Towards cyclic 
fabrication systems for modular robotics and rapid 
manufacturing,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and 
Systems, 2009. 
[15] K. Gilpin, A. Knaian, and D. Rus, “Robot pebbles: One 
centimeter modules for programmable matter through self-
disassembly,” in 2010 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, 2010, pp. 2485–2492. 
[16] M. T. Tolley, M. Kalontarov, J. Neubert, D. Erickson, and H. 
Lipson, “Stochastic Modular Robotic Systems: A Study of Fluidic 
Assembly Strategies,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 26, 
no. 3, pp. 518–530, Jun. 2010. 
[17] A. N. Knaian, K. C. Cheung, M. B. Lobovsky, A. J. Oines, P. 
Schmidt-Neilsen, and N. A. Gershenfeld, “The Milli-Motein: A 
self-folding chain of programmable matter with a one centimeter 
module pitch,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012, pp. 1447–1453. 
[18] H. Funakubo and J. B. Kennedy, “Shape memory alloys,” Gordon 
and Breach, xii+ 275, 15 x 22 cm, Illustrated, 1987. 
[19] M. K. A. Koker, J. Schaab, N. Zotov, and E. J. Mittemeijer, “X-
ray diffraction study of the reverse martensitic transformation in 
NiTi shape memory thin films,” Thin Solid Films, 2013. 
[20] J. Rao, T. Roberts, K. Lawson, and J. Nicholls, “Nickel titanium 
and nickel titanium hafnium shape memory alloy thin films,” 
Surface and Coatings Technology, vol. 204, no. 15, pp. 2331–
2336, 2010. 
[21] A. D. Johnson, V. V Martynov, V. Gupta, and A. Bose, “Thin-
film shape memory alloy device and method.” 2013. 
[22] X.-Z. Ma, L. Zhang, G.-H. Cao, Y. Lin, and J. Tang, 
“Electrochemical micromachining of nitinol by confined-etchant-
layer technique,” Electrochimica Acta, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 4191–
4196, 2007. 
[23] J. A. Walker, K. J. Gabriel, and M. Mehregany, “Thin-film 
processing of TiNi shape memory alloy,” Sensors and Actuators 
A: Physical, vol. 21, no. 1–3, pp. 243–246, Feb. 1990. 
[24] N. Muhammad, D. Whitehead, A. Boor, W. Oppenlander, Z. Liu, 
and L. Li, “Picosecond laser micromachining of nitinol and 
platinum–iridium alloy for coronary stent applications,” Applied 
Physics A, vol. 106, no. 3, pp. 607–617, Oct. 2011. 
[25] “FLEXINOL® Technical and Design Data - Metric.” . 
[26] T. Hall, “Bonding to nickel-titanium alloy,” EP Patent 0,515,078, 
1997.  
[27] D.P. Perrin, A. Kwon, R.D. Howe, “A Novel Actuated Tether 
Design for Rescue Robots Using Hydraulic Transients,” 2004 
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
(ICRA 2004),New Orleans, LA, April 26th to May 1st, 2004. 
[28]  Boxerbaum, A. S., Shaw, K. M., Chiel, H. J., & Quinn, R. D. 
(2012). Continuous wave peristaltic motion in a robot. The 
International Journal of Robotics Research, 31(3), 302-318. 
1246
