  
  
Abstract—This paper introduces the CYCLOPS, a novel 
robotic tool for single-access and natural-orifice endoscopic 
surgery. Based on the concept of tendon-driven parallel robots, 
this highly original design gives the system some of its unique 
capabilities. Just to name a few, unparalleled force exertion 
capabilities of up to 65N, large and adjustable workspace, 
bimanual instrument triangulation. Due to the simplicity and 
nature of the design, the system could be adapted to an existing 
laparoscope or flexible endoscope. This promises a more 
immediate and accelerated route to clinical translation not only 
through endearing low-cost and adaptive features, but also by 
directly addressing several major barriers of existing designs. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Surgical innovators are currently pursuing a second 
renaissance in minimally invasive surgery (MIS) techniques. 
The first-generation of MIS was defined by a paradigm shift 
from traditional large open surgical incisions to multiple 
small ‘key-hole’ incisions. This transition inferred many 
patient benefits, contributing to the acceptance of MIS as 
standard surgical care in many settings. Today, there is 
growing momentum towards further minimizing access 
trauma such that many procedures may be essentially 
‘scarless’ when performed via single-incision laparoscopic 
surgery (SILS), natural orifice endoluminal surgery (NOES) 
and natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery 
(NOTES) techniques. 
While it seems logical and naturally progressive to refine, 
or re-define, surgical techniques to be more minimally 
invasive, the reality of these ambitions is that they are 
inextricably reliant upon enabling technology. Potentially 
disruptive novel techniques need tools that are purpose 
designed to fulfill these clinical needs. Such gateway 
technology inevitably involves fundamentally bespoke 
features, ranging from entirely unique platform design to 
radical modification of existing market items. With the 
exception of improved image quality and minor adjustments 
in scalability, the laparoscope and flexible endoscope are 
items of surgical technology that remain essentially 
undisturbed since they were first introduced several decades 
 
Aspects of this research are supported by the National Institute for Health 
Research (NIHR) Biomedical Research Centre based at Imperial College 
Healthcare NHS Trust and Imperial College London. 
Patent application GB1316333.2 has been filed for the presented system. 
All authors are with the Hamlyn Centre for Robotic Surgery, Institute of 
Global Health Innovation, Imperial College London, SW72AZ, London, UK 
e-mail: {george.mylonas; v.vitiello07; t.cundy; a.darzi; g.z.yang} 
@imperial.ac.uk 
*Corresponding author: George Mylonas, Hamlyn Centre, 3rd Floor, 
Paterson Wing, South Wharf Rd, London W21NY, (tel:+44(0)2033125145) 
ago and still are the default platforms for SILS, NOES and 
NOTES. It is unsurprising therefore, that several novel 
techniques have achieved little progression beyond the 
experimental phase, despite nearly 10 years of committed 
effort. There are currently a variety of prototype platforms 
for SILS, NOES and NOTES that are being developed 
worldwide by a number of academic groups. Most platforms 
remain in the pre-clinical phase with only a small number 
having reported feasibility in in-vivo settings. The most 
notable ones are discussed by Vitiello et al in [1] and are 
shown here in Fig. 1. Major limitations of these prototypes 
are universally shared. These pertain to adequate 
triangulation, force delivery, stability and control. 
The CYCLOPS design seeks to overcome the above 
limitations by addressing bimanual instrument triangulation 
and force-delivery over a large workspace via a highly 
original design which is based on the concept of tendon-
driven parallel robots. The system is adaptive to the existing 
laparoscope or flexible endoscope, while the stability and the 
navigational control of these existing instruments are 
preserved. This paper is dedicated to the description of the 
CYCLOPS concept, its current stage of development and 
supporting preliminary data. To the authors’ knowledge, this 
is the first design of its kind, demonstrating functional 
capabilities unmatched by existing platforms.  
CYCLOPS: A Versatile Robotic Tool for Bimanual 
Single-Access and Natural-Orifice Endoscopic Surgery 
George P. Mylonas*, Member, IEEE, Valentina Vitiello, Member, IEEE, Thomas P. Cundy, 
Ara Darzi, Guang-Zhong Yang, Fellow, IEEE 
 
Fig. 1. A selection of current prototype and commercial platforms for SILS, 
NOES and NOTES from [1]. First row:  SPRINT (Scuola Superiore Sant-
Anna), Anubiscope
?
 (Karl Storz), HVSPS (TUM), Single-Port (Intuitive 
Surgical). Second row: MASTER (Nanyang Technological University), 
Master-Slave (Strasbourg/IRCAD), i-Snake
?
 (Imperial College London). 
Third row: SPIDER
?
 (TransEnterix), IREP (Vanderbilt University), 
EndoSamurai? (Olympus), Cobra? (USGI Medical). 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2436
  
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
In this section, the conceptual design of the CYCLOPS is 
introduced first, followed by a detailed description of its core 
component -the tendon-driven parallel robotic manipulator. 
Lastly, a description of the first working prototype of the 
CYCLOPS system is provided. 
A. CYCLOPS Conceptual Design 
With reference to Fig. 2, the unique component of the 
CYCLOPS is a deployable peripheral structure resembling 
an open-ended bulb, attached at the distal end of an 
endoscopic shaft. Ultimately, it can be adapted and fitted at 
the distal end of a conventional laparoscope or flexible 
endoscope (henceforth both referred to as “scope”). The 
peripheral structure is low profile and un-obtrusive to the 
functionality of the main scope as it maneuvers to the target 
anatomy. In its collapsed state it can be integrated by means 
of a scope over-sheath or pre-affixed cap attachment.  Once 
appropriately located at the operative site, the structure is 
deployed in a gradual and controlled manner to form an 
expanded near-rigid scaffold that is covered with a soft 
sheet-like biocompatible material. Its size can be scalable to 
suit procedural needs. A network of tendons is arranged 
within the bulb to actuate rigid hollow over-tubes which can 
then be controlled in adequate degrees-of-freedom (DoF) to 
perform complex maneuvers. The tendons are inserted in the 
bulb through fulcrum points positioned at lateral eyelets on 
the bulb surface and allow high forces to be exerted through 
the rigid over-tubes.  The design is based on the concept of 
wire-driven parallel robots [2]. From their most distal aspect, 
the tendons are networked through and around the body of 
the scaffold and then congregate at the bulb ‘neck’ where 
they are bundled through one of the available internal 
channels of the scope. A motorized driving unit at the 
proximal-end provides computer-assisted actuation. The 
tendon-driven over-tubes are serving as attachment hubs for 
the tendons and are used to accommodate off-the-shelf 
flexible instruments and focused energy delivery devices. 
These may be delivered via existing internal channel(s) of 
the scope. The instruments may be immediately actuated by 
the above mechanism once docked within the over-tubes 
with a ‘clip-lock-and-play’ mechanism. Alternatively, the 
rigid over-tubes could be replaced by bespoke surgical 
instruments. Additional tendons could also be used to control 
the position of other equipment, such as an additional 
camera. The bulb is collapsible for extraction or extubation 
of the instruments. The concept is schematically illustrated in 
Fig. 2 along with an artistic impression of how a CYCLOPS 
system would look as part of a flexible or a rigid scope. 
At the core of the CYCLOPS design lies a tendon-driven 
parallel robotic manipulator, delivered through its supporting 
peripheral structure. This is presented in more detail in the 
remaining sections. 
B. Tendon-Driven Parallel Robotic Manipulator 
One of the primary roles of the peripheral -bulb shaped- 
deployable structure, is to act as a semi-rigid scaffold for 
support and deployment of the tendons that control the 
surgical instruments. Fig. 3a shows a cross section of the 
structure as seen from one side, with only four of the tendons 
depicted. The tendon pairs are attached at a distance along 
the length of the rigid over-tube. Through small openings at 
lateral positions on the scaffold, the tendons can slide all the 
way to the back. The openings are placed in such a manner 
 
Fig. 2. The conceptual design of the system showing the CYCLOPS module attached to a standard endoscope, the peripheral scaffold deployment phases, 
the tendons controlling rigid over-tubes, and the introduced flexible instruments, followed by an artistic impression of the envisaged system as a clip-on 
adaptor to conventional scopes. 
2437
  
that the tendons of each pair can exert antagonistic actuation 
forces on the rigid over-tube along different motion planes. 
This allows achieving different poses of the rigid over-tube 
when the length of the tendons is modified appropriately. 
Specifically, due to the unilateral property of tendons (e.g. 
they can only pull and not push), N number of tendons will 
allow the actuation of the over-tube at 1 N ? DoF [2]. In 
addition, it is critical to always maintain positive tendon 
tension during actuation in order to ensure the controllability 
of the moving over-tube. Since the tendon tension 
distribution is determined by the geometrical configuration 
of the system, different workspaces can be achieved by 
adjusting the position of the tendon attachments along the 
over-tube, as well as the location of the fulcrum points on the 
peripheral scaffold. 
With the CYCLOPS, six tendons are used per over-tube 
providing five DoF manipulation, while two over-tubes are 
incorporated for bimanual control. This equates to twelve 
tendons being used in total. Fig. 3b demonstrates the concept 
using an orthogonal peripheral scaffold rather than a 
spherical structure for the sake of clarity. The fulcrum entry 
points at the top and bottom planes are shared by the 
respective tendons driving the two over-tubes. Currently, the 
CYCLOPS prototype is using a single over-tube. Since the 
design is symmetric, a second over-tube would be governed 
by the exact same considerations. 
In order to determine the controllable workspace of the 
CYCLOPS, each over-tube is modeled as a cable-driven 
parallel mechanism according to [3]. The length of each 
tendon is calculated as the distance between the feeding 
point on the scaffold 
i
B and the corresponding attachment 
point on the rigid over-tube 
i
P : 
i i i
B P = l
uuuur
 ( 1,2,..., i N = ). To 
calculate the kinematics of the over-tube, these points are 
expressed in an inertial base frame {B}, while a moving 
frame {P} is attached to the centre of mass of the over-tube 
P . The position of point P can be expressed in the base 
frame as { }
T
x y z = p so that the transformation between 
base and moving frame is given by: 
1
P
B
? ?
=
? ?
? ?
R p
T
0
,                                   (1) 
where the rotation matrix R represents the orientation of the 
moving frame {P} with respect to the base frame {B} 
according to the Z-Y-X Euler angles ?, ? and ?. As 
discussed above, the tendons have to exert tension forces on 
the over-tube to keep it in equilibrium against any external 
wrench { , }
T
p p
= f f m applied during motion. By applying 
the equilibrium conditions at the centre of mass of the over-
tube we obtain: 
 
Fig. 3. (a) A cross section of the peripheral structure as seen from the side. The four tendons shown here are attached on the over-tube and through small 
openings on the scaffold they slide and congregate at the neck of the scaffold. One of the available scope channels is used to feed them all the way to the 
back at a motorized control unit. (b) An orthogonal scaffold demonstrates the tendon arrangement used with the CYCLOPS. The assignment of the base 
reference frame and the moving tool frame, as well as the positions of the feeding and attachment points of the tendons used to compute the kinematics and 
structural model of the system, are also shown. The tendon numbering for the single existing tool is also indicated. 
 
Fig. 4. Typical end-effector workspaces for a bimanual CYCLOPS for different tendon attachment distance and entry point distance configurations. The 
workspace volume of a single tool for each configuration is quoted, along with the corresponding workspace range on the x, y and z axis of the base frame. 
The overlapping workspace is also visible, signifying the ability of the tools to perform maneuvers requiring crossing into each other’s workspaces. 
2438
  
 + = A t f 0 ,                                    (2) 
where 
1 2
{ , ,..., }
T
N
t t t = t is the tendon tension vector and A is 
called the structure matrix of the system and is given by: 
1
1
1 1
1
1 1
...
1 1
...
N
N
N N
N
l l
l l
? ?
? ?
? ?
? ?
=
? ?
? ? ? ?
? ?
? ?
l l
A
r l r l
.                      (3) 
The position of each tendon attachment point on the over-
tube during motion can be expressed in the base frame as: 
i i
= + p p Rr ,                                  (4) 
where the vector 
i
r defines the position of the attachment 
point 
i
p with respect to the centre of mass of the over-tube 
expressed in the moving frame {P}.  
As discussed above, the controllable workspace of the over-
tube is given by the set of poses satisfying equation (2) with 
0 (1, , )
i
t i N ≥ ? ? K . However, in real systems the tendon 
tension needs to be limited to a maximum 
max
t value to 
avoid breakage and also to maintain a small pretension 
min
t , 
so that the solution of equation (2) is acceptable only if 
[ ]
min max
,
i
t t t ? . The corresponding feasible workspace for 
left and right over-tubes can be found by solving a nonlinear 
optimization problem as described in [2]. In a nutshell, the 
algorithm first finds the highest and lowest tendon tension 
solutions for a number of poses of the rigid over-tube; if both 
solutions are within the allowable tendon tension range the 
corresponding pose is added to the feasible workspace, 
otherwise it is discarded. To highlight the effect on the 
workspace of different tendon configurations, the resulting 
CYCLOPS workspace for a minimum tension value of 0.01 
N and a maximum of 120 N corresponding to three exemplar 
tendon configurations is shown in Fig. 4, where the external 
wrench is considered null. 
C. CYCLOPS Working Prototype 
At the time of writing this manuscript, the CYCLOPS 
prototype has a rigid scaffold, which is considered already 
deployed (Phase 4 in Fig. 2). Also, only a single over-tube 
with its six dedicated tendons is available, corresponding to 
the right-hand surgical tool of a bimanual system. The left-
hand over-tube would require identical considerations to its 
symmetric counterpart, as discussed previously.  
Fig. 5 shows the CYCLOPS working prototype. The 
peripheral scaffold is constructed using a clear polystyrene 
sphere, made up of two hollow hemispheres. These are 
commonly used for decorations. The external diameter of the 
sphere is 100 mm with a wall thickness of 1.5 mm. A 13 mm 
diameter hole is opened at the apex of one hemisphere and a 
hollow polystyrene tube is glued in place to allow flexible 
instruments to be inserted in the over-tube, as shown in Fig. 
5a. Centered at the apex of the second hemisphere, a larger 
opening with a diameter of 52 mm is cut out. Six tendon 
fulcrum points are opened on the scaffold and 1 mm internal 
diameter ceramic eyelets are inserted to minimize the friction 
and smooth out the angulation of the sliding tendons. The 
exact position of the fulcrum points is indicated in Fig. 3.  
For the tendons, nylon braided fishing line is used with a 
breaking strength of 14 kg. Brass crimps are used to attach 
 
Fig. 5. The CYCLOPS working prototype at its early stage of development. (a) Flexible standard instruments can be inserted in the over-tube. (b) A sliding 
collet is used to allow adjustment of the tendons position on the over-tube. (c) Six load cells at the driving unit are used to measure tendon tension. (d) The 
CYCLOPS prototype is controlled by means of a haptic manipulator. 
2439
  
the tendons onto the aluminum over-tube via through-holes 
at its proximal end and sliding loops at its more distal end. A 
screw-tightened sliding collet allows easy adjustment of the 
distal tendons position along the axis of the over-tube (Fig. 
5b). The over-tube has an external diameter of 4 mm.   
The scaffold and the shaft are mounted on a base together 
with a motorized tendon-driving unit. The unit uses six 
brushless DC servomotors with integrated CAN controller 
and a 25:1 ratio gear-head (Faulhaber 2232S024BX4 CCD-
3830 + 22F 25:1). The motors’ maximum torque is lowered 
by enabling the current limiting function on the built-in 
motion controller.  Each motor actuates a 9 mm diameter 
Delrin
?
 wormscrew used to control the length of the 
corresponding tendon. At the base of the driving unit, a 
series of six full-bridge thin-beam load cells (Omega LCL-
010) are mounted. Miniature ceramic bearing rollers are used 
to transmit the tendon tension to the load cells as shown in 
Fig. 5c. For monitoring the tendon tension, an InstruNet 
INET-100HC data acquisition unit is used. The device 
allows 8 differential analogue inputs to be digitized and 
transferred to a computer over a USB controller. 
For controlling the CYCLOPS, a Geomagic
?
 Touch? 
(formerly Sensable Phantom Omni) haptic device is used 
(Fig. 5d). All software is written in C++. The whole system 
is easily portable and a single laptop is used for connecting 
the master manipulator, the CAN controller for the motors 
and the data acquisition unit for the load cells. 
At the time of writing this paper, position control of the 
tendon-driven over-tube is achieved on the basis of simple 
geometrical considerations. Under this control regime, the 
motion commands from the haptic device are translated into 
tendon length variations according to the inverse kinematic 
model of the system and then sent to the motors for 
appropriate actuation of the corresponding wormscrews. As 
already discussed, for efficient control of tendon-driven 
parallel robots, force-control is required instead to ensure 
that the tendon tension vector is always positive. Although 
this is not implemented in the current prototype, the 
information acquired from the load cells will be used at a 
later stage for this purpose. Nevertheless, even at its present 
stage of development the CYCLOPS is able to demonstrate 
its operational capabilities, which are discussed next. 
III. OPERATIONAL CAPABILITIES 
To further highlight the capabilities of the CYCLOPS, a 
number of experiments have been carried out. The first is a 
standard peg-transfer task from the Fundamentals of 
Laparoscopic Surgery (FLS). Since only one instrument is 
available at this stage, the task had to be slightly modified by 
omitting the mid-air object transfer from hand to hand. 
Instead, a single instrument has been used to transfer an 
object back and forth between four pegs, performing eight 
peg transfers in total. Control of the instrument is achieved 
using the haptic manipulator. For grasping, a standard 
flexible endoscopic forceps is introduced through the 
CYCLOPS hollow shaft into the tendon-driven over-tube. 
Opening and closing of the grasper is manually achieved by 
the user using the left hand to control the thumb-ring on the 
handle of the forceps (Fig. 6 top). During this task the 
execution time has been recorded along with the number of 
successful transfers. 
In previous sections, the CYCLOPS workspace was 
characterized and it was discussed how it is influenced by 
changes in the tendon configuration. The second set of 
experiments aims to investigate the force-exertion 
capabilities of the CYCLOPS and how these are affected by 
changes in the tendon configuration. An external load cell is 
used to measure the force exerted by the tool end-effector in 
six directions when the over-tube is aligned with the base 
coordinate system (Fig. 3b). The load cell is rigidly attached 
at a fixed position with respect to the CYCLOPS body (Fig. 
6 bottom). For most measurements, the end-effector is 
attached to the load cell by means of hooks and a string of 
the same material as the tendons. Only for the pushing 
measurements in the +X direction, the end-effector is 
directly pushing against the load cell. While the user is 
controlling the end-effector motion in a required direction, 
the external load cell readings are recorded, along with all 
tendon tensions. 
For pair-wise comparison with the respective workspace 
investigations shown in Fig. 4, the two tendon configurations 
that have been tested are with the tendons attached on the 
over-tube at 40 mm (narrow configuration) and at 63 mm 
(wide configuration) apart. The proximal tendons are kept in 
the same position in both cases, which is close to the over-
tube entry point. The exerted force measurements are taken 
at the end-effector position located 85 mm from the proximal 
tendons. All force measurements have been initiated with the 
over-tube starting roughly from the same initial position 
aligned with the main diameter of the spherical scaffold.  
IV. RESULTS 
Being at a very early stage of development, the 
CYCLOPS system does not allow for proper validation using 
standardized tests, such as the FLS. Nevertheless, the peg-
transfer task described above was routinely carried out 
successfully, achieving very low execution times of a few 
seconds with 100% success rate. Although at times it felt 
somewhat challenging reaching certain configurations with 
the CYCLOPS instrument, most of the time and for the 
majority of the hand maneuvers, the desired response could 
be achieved. This behavior was expected, given the lack of 
 
 
Fig. 6. At the top, the peg-transfer task, showing the 4 pegs used for the 
transfer. The thumb-ring that allows the user to actuate the grasper’s 
opening and closing is also visible. At the bottom, from left to right, the 
experiments showing forces assessed in the +Y, +Z, +X and –X directions. 
2440
  
force-control of the tendons. It is anticipated that when this is 
in place, any manipulation uncertainty will disappear. A 
difficulty of the task was also related to the bimanual 
coordination between the master manipulator controlled with 
the right hand and the thumb-ring that was controlled with 
the left hand. Also, the task was further complicated by the 
visual-motor misalignment caused by the lack of aligned 
views that an onboard camera would normally provide.  
The next set of experiments helped to vividly 
demonstrate the unparalleled force exertion capabilities of 
the CYCLOPS. The plots in Fig. 7 show the recorded force 
on the tool end-effector along with the respective tendon 
tensions. The six plots on the left column correspond to the 
narrow tendon configuration, while the six plots on the right 
are obtained with the wide tendon configuration. Each row 
represents one of the six directions along which the force 
exertion capabilities of the CYCLOPS were tested. The high 
force capability of the system becomes immediately 
apparent. The highest recorded force is over 6.5 kg (65 N) 
for the narrow configuration on the positive X axis, while the 
minimum recorded value is close to 0.7 kg (7 N). TABLE I 
shows the maximum forces achieved in all directions for 
both configurations. From the force plots, the necessity of 
implementing a force-control framework becomes obvious. 
This is clear, by the large variability of the tendon tensions 
during the execution of a single experiment. Control of the 
tool in the required direction is achieved by the master 
 
Fig. 7. The thick black line represents the recorded force on the tool end-effector. Colored lines correspond to the tendon tensions. The six plots on the left 
column correspond to the narrow tendon configuration, while the six plots on the right are obtained with the wide tendon configuration. Each row represents 
one of the six directions along which the force exertion capabilities of the CYCLOPS were tested 
2441
  
manipulator with no force feedback. Consequently, the user 
is oblivious to the amount of force exerted by the tool, or the 
motors torque capability at any given time as they keep 
translating the master in the desired direction. While some 
motors stall due to reaching their maximum capacity (around 
3.5-4 kg from the plots), some others keep rotating without 
affecting the length of the corresponding tendons in an 
attempt to follow the inverse kinematics model. This is 
visible in almost all plots where tendon tension often drops 
to zero. What also becomes immediately apparent is that 
different tendon configurations endow the system with 
different characteristics in terms of its force capabilities. One 
tendon configuration favors certain directions while another 
configuration favors different directions. Another 
observation is that relatively small forces are observed when 
the load cell is pulling the end-effector in the –Y direction. 
This can be attributed to the initial position of the over-tube, 
which is close to the main diameter of the spherical scaffold. 
Near this position, the angle between tendons 3 and 4 (see 
Fig. 3b) is obtuse which means that the amplitude of the 
composite force vector is small.  
There are a lot more conclusions that could be drawn 
from the force plots. The most important at this stage is that 
the CYCLOPS possesses high force exertion abilities and 
that for a more exhaustive assessment of its operational 
capabilities force-control will have to be implemented. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper we have introduced the CYCLOPS, a novel 
robotic system for endoscopic surgery. Even at its very early 
stage of development, the design is able to demonstrate a 
number of qualities and features that make the CYCLOPS 
stand out from other existing systems. Preliminary 
investigations have demonstrated its high force exertion 
capabilities. With forces as high as 65 N and no lower than 7 
N it is already more powerful than any existing design that 
has come to the author’s attention. It is expected that when 
force-control is implemented, the low end of the force 
exertion capabilities will be improved. Also, the flexibility of 
the CYCLOPS in modifying the force and workspace 
profiles makes the proposed design ideal for adaptation to 
different surgical requirements. A variable size peripheral 
structure does not invalidate the working principle of the 
design while at the same time allows customization for 
different surgical requirements and lumen sizes. 
Full evaluation of the capabilities as well as the 
limitations of the system requires further investigations. 
However, due to its principle of operation and the simplicity 
of the design, the CYCLOPS already shows its potential. 
Some of its strengths are: reliable actuation, low cost, low 
weight, potential MRI compatibility, and reliable force 
feedback for haptics due to the direct force mapping 
principle involved. 
On a less dithyrambic tone, there are still a number of 
design issues to be resolved before the CYCLOPS can find 
its way into clinical practice. One of the major research areas 
we are already working on is related to the design of the 
peripheral structure. In its original conception, the scaffold is 
considered as a purely inflatable mechanism that can be 
deployed and collapsed. This way, the “bulb” can also be 
used for intracorporeal space creation, tissue suction and 
invagination, and subsequently tissue extraction. While 
research in this direction is undergoing, preliminary 
investigations have shown that the spherical and continuous 
structure is ideal for spreading and balancing out the forces 
exerted by the tendons, offering stability and high force 
capabilities. 
In terms of easily switching between different force and 
workspace profiles, for instance from one that favors force in 
a given axis to one that favors large workspace, it was shown 
that one way of achieving this is by changing the position of 
the tendons along the tool. Although this functionality seems 
easy to incorporate, it is expected to require considerable 
research and development effort. 
On a closing remark, we need to mention the lack of 
rotation of the CYCLOPS over-tube around its main axis, as 
due to the existing configuration only 5DoF are feasible. 
Although not yet assessed to what extent this impedes task 
execution, there are some potential solutions to this 
limitation. One approach would be to incorporate an 
additional tendon, bringing the total number to 7. Another 
option would be using a bespoke motorized instrument in 
lieu of the existing over-tube. There are also other options 
which are being currently investigated. 
The aim of the CYCLOPS concept is to provide a 
platform that enables new techniques like SILS, NOTES and 
NOES to be more realizable in the short-tem in a clinical 
setting. This is proposed by a unique and highly original 
design that is adaptive to the existing laparoscope or flexible 
endoscope. This approach promises a more immediate and 
accelerated route to clinical translation not only through 
endearing low-cost and adaptive features, but also by directly 
addressing several major existing barriers in platform design. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Petros Giataganas for his 
help with CAD and prototyping. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Vitiello, L. Su-Lin, T. P. Cundy, and Y. Guang-Zhong, "Emerging 
Robotic Platforms for Minimally Invasive Surgery," Biomedical 
Engineering, IEEE Reviews in, vol. 6, pp. 111-126, 2013. 
[2] M. Hiller, S. Fang, S. Mielczarek, R. Verhoeven, and D. Franitza, 
"Design, analysis and realization of tendon-based parallel 
manipulators," Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 40, pp. 429-
445, 2005. 
[3] C. B. Pham, S. H. Yeo, G. Yang, M. S. Kurbanhusen, and I. M. Chen, 
"Force-closure workspace analysis of cable-driven parallel 
mechanisms," Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 41, pp. 53-69, 
2006. 
TABLE I. CYCLOPS force exertion capabilities in all directions.  
The force direction is regarded as the load pulling on the tool 
Direction of applied force 
Max exerted force in kg (N) 
Narrow - 40 mm Wide - 63 mm 
+X 6.5 (65) 3.2 (32) 
-X 3.9 (39) 3.2 (32) 
+Y 0.9 (9) 2.7 (27) 
-Y 0.7 (7) 0.9 (9) 
+Z 1.3 (13) 2.2 (22) 
-Z 1.4 (14) 2.2 (22) 
 
2442
