  
 
Fig. 1.  Micron shown with FBG force sensor installed as the end-
effector. Coordinate axes for Micron are shown in blue, denoted with the 
‘p’ subscript. Sensing axes for the 2DOF FBG sensor are shown in white, 
denoted with the ‘f’ subscript. The sensor axes are aligned with the 
respective X and Y Micron handpiece axes.  
 
? 
Abstract—Vitreoretinal microsurgery requires precise hand-
eye coordination to manipulate delicate structures within the 
eye on the order of tens of microns. To achieve these tasks, 
surgeons use tools of diameter 0.9 mm or less to access the eye’s 
interior structures. The level of force required during these 
manipulations is often below the human tactile threshold, 
requiring the surgeon to rely on subtle visual cues or to apply 
larger forces above the tactile threshold for feedback. However, 
both of these methods can lead to tissue damage. Excursions can 
be made into tissues which are not felt by the surgeon, while 
larger forces have a higher chance of damaging tissue within 
the eye. To prevent damage to the retina and other anatomy, we 
present the implementation of hybrid position/force control 
operating in the sub-tactile force range for a handheld robotic 
system. This approach resulted in a 42% reduction in the mean 
force and 52% reduction in maximum force during peeling 
tasks. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Surgical intervention by membrane peeling is one of the 
most common procedures performed in ophthalmology. 
Multiple diseases result in the need to remove the inner 
limiting membrane (also known as the internal limiting 
membrane, ILM), epiretinal membrane, or both. The ILM is 
a natural, thin (1 to 4 µm) membrane in the eye that separates 
the retina from the vitreous body (a gel-like substance that 
fills the interior space of the eye). Epiretinal membranes are 
prevalent in 4-11% of the population age 50 and up [2]. The 
epiretinal membrane consists of fibrous tissue that forms on 
the surface of the ILM, typically less than 5 µm thickness 
[1]. As the epiretinal membrane thickens the patient’s vision 
becomes distorted due to retinal traction. In serious cases the 
stretching will cause the retina to tear, leading to a macular 
hole. Without treatment the macular hole can progress to 
retinal detachment and ultimately a loss of vision.  
To remove the forces on the retina creating the macular 
hole, it has been demonstrated that peeling the ILM and 
epiretinal membrane is the most effective treatment option 
for long-term recovery [3][4]. To remove the membrane the 
surgeon first visually scans the retina surface to identify an 
appropriate edge for beginning the peel. A hooked tip or 
microforceps is then used to carefully lift the membrane from 
the identified edge. However, if the membrane tears or part 
of the membrane is fully removed, the surgeon must return to 
the retina surface to begin another peel. The process of 
 
*Research supported by the U.S. National Institutes of Health (grant 
nos. R01EB000526 and R01EB007969). 
T. S. Wells is with the Biomedical Engineering Department, Carnegie 
Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: twells@cmu.edu). 
R. A. MacLachlan and C. N. Riviere are with the Robotics Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA.  
removing the membrane requires surgeons to perform 
multiple manipulations close to the retina surface where 
many factors contribute to decreased positioning accuracy 
[5] that may lead to retinal damage. In addition, one group 
discovered that more than 50% of patients experienced 
damage to the nerve fiber layer as a result of membrane 
peeling [6]. Those with damage had partial blind spots in 
their field of vision. Although the blind spots were unnoticed 
by the patients, damage to the nerve fiber layer does 
influence vision and is to be avoided by limiting the forces 
imposed on the retina.  
To accomplish this task a handheld robotic 
micromanipulator designed for assisting vitreoretinal 
surgeons is proposed. The peeling task is divided into two 
tasks; grasping and peeling. During grasping, the surgeon 
must engage the membrane edge while minimizing contact 
and damage to the retina surface. After the edge is grasped 
successfully, the membrane is carefully peeled from the 
retina. This procedure is often repeated multiple times until 
the membrane has been completely removed.  
To augment surgical performance there are a number of 
platforms which focus on providing robotic assistance for 
vitreoretinal surgery. Among these systems are the 
teleoperated microsurgical robotic system from the 
Toward Hybrid Position/Force Control for an Active Handheld 
Micromanipulator 
Trent S. Wells, Robert A. MacLachlan, and Cameron N. Riviere 
X
p 
Y
p 
Z
p 
X
f 
Y
f 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 772
  
 
Fig. 2.  The system setup is shown with (a) surgical microscope, (b) 
optical tracker (“ASAP”), (c) Sorbothane and PDMS platform, (d) 
Micron with FBG sensor installed, and (e) optical interrogator. 
 
University of Tokyo [7], and the Johns Hopkins Steady Hand 
[8], which shares control between the surgeon and a rigid 
robotic arm in order to reduce tremor and provide more 
accurate positioning for the surgeon. To minimize cost and 
maximize the natural feel of instrument usage, our laboratory 
has developed Micron [9], a fully handheld 
micromanipulator which is discussed further in Section II.B.  
Balicki et al. have shown success in improving peeling 
using auditory feedback [10]. However, this is focused more 
as a training aid for surgeons, and only during the peeling 
phase, not during the membrane-engaging or grasping phase.  
Most recently, Kuru et al. [11] have integrated a small 
force sensor with microforceps for grasping tasks such as 
membrane peeling. The surgeon control is augmented by 
auditory feedback, and combined with the Johns Hopkins 
Steady Hand robot for peeling of bandages and the inner 
shell membrane of chicken eggs.   
Becker et al. implemented vision-based control for 
limiting velocity of the tip during peeling [12]. Since a large 
portion of the membrane peeling is related to the viscoelastic 
properties of the membrane, as discussed in Section II, this 
velocity-limiting approach succeeded in limiting applied 
force. Although this showed promising results, the heavy 
reliance on visual-based methods does not allow an easy 
transition between the rubber-based model and a real eye. 
Latt et al. have described the implementation of force 
control in a one-degree-of-freedom (1DOF) handheld 
micromanipulator [13].  To the authors’ knowledge, the 
present work represents the first implementation of force 
control in a fully handheld micromanipulator with multiple 
degrees of freedom. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. Membrane Peeling 
The internal limiting membrane is often 4 µm thick or 
less, making the likelihood of damaging the retina surface 
when grasping the membrane a high possibility without 
further assistance. Based on studies by Uneri et al., the initial 
point of failure for retinal membranes begins near 7.5 mN 
[8]. However, previous investigation has shown that 
surgeons are only able to detect roughly 19% of the events 
that occur near the 7.5 mN threshold [14]. Although the level 
at which damage occurs to the nerve fiber layer is still 
unknown, it is undoubtedly below the level of force required 
to tear the membrane.  
B. Micron, a Fully Handheld Micromanipulator 
To achieve greater accuracy and implement the hybrid 
position/force control for peeling tasks, a fully handheld 
micromanipulator, Micron, is used (Fig. 1). The aim of 
developing Micron has been to improve the precision and 
accuracy of the operator [9]. Micron is a 6DOF robot based 
on a miniature Gough-Stewart platform design, to achieve 
manipulation of its end-effector over a 4 mm ? 4 mm 
cylindrical workspace. Stabilization of the end-effector is 
implemented using a 1.5 Hz lowpass filter for the purpose of 
cancelling normal hand tremor and a special shelving filter 
that optionally scales user motion by 1/3 when performing 
fine manipulation tasks. 
The 6DOF pose of the handle and manipulator platform 
are tracked by a custom-built microscale optical tracker, 
ASAP (Apparatus to Sense Accuracy of Position) [15]. Six 
near infrared LEDs are affixed to the handle and manipulator 
platform which are detected by two position sensitive 
detectors (PSDs) at 1 KHz. The LED positions are 
determined with less than 10 ?m RMS error over a 
workspace of 4 cm
3
.  
C. Millinewton Force Sensor 
In order to provide force feedback of the direct tool 
tissue interaction, the force sensor must be able to provide 
real-time measurement from within the eye. In a previous 
approach by Berkelman et al. [16], the force sensor was 
placed at the proximal end of the shaft, closest to the tool 
handle, i.e., outside the eye. Although the tissue interactions 
at the tip were detected, interactions at the insertion point 
were an order of magnitude larger than the forces observed 
within the eye, making it impossible to distinguish the 
applied forces at the tip when inserted [17].  
To provide force feedback from within the eye, a 2DOF 
optical force sensor has been developed at Johns Hopkins 
with the specific aim of detecting sub-tactile forces [18]. To 
achieve this, three optical fibers, 160 µm in diameter, each 
with a 1-cm-long fiber Bragg grating (FBG), are arranged 
along a thin shaft in cylindrical configuration 120° apart. The 
FBG is placed close to the tip such that the interactions at the 
insertion point are not detected. A calibration procedure is 
then used to relate the amount of deflection in each FBG to 
2DOF force. The three fibers provide temperature 
compensated measurements with a resolution of 0.25 mN. 
The sensor package is 0.5 mm in diameter with a hooked 
end-effector for use during a standard membrane peeling 
operation. The sensor has been installed at the tip of Micron 
in order to provide force feedback to the control system. 
b 
a 
c 
d 
e 
773
  
 
Fig. 4.  Gain and phase of the control system under position input. 
Displacement is attenuated by 20 dB up to a corner of 0.5 Hz; the 
attenuation rolls off to 0 dB at approximately 15 Hz. 
∑ Manipulator
Force 
Controller
∑ 
∑ 
X a
F a
F d
X d + D h
+
-
-
+
Convert to
Position
Cancellation 
Filter
Position 
Controller
∑ 
∑ 
D p
+
D f
+
+
+
+
+
+
Fig. 3.  Hybrid position/force control scheme. X d+D h is the respective 
goal and hand position desired. X a and F a are the actual measurements of 
the output. D p and D f are the system disturbance inputs for the respective 
position and force. The position loop runs independently when there are 
no forces acting on the tool tip. Once forces are sensed, a force error is 
generated based on the force constraints set. A corrective position term is 
then added to the output from the position loop.  
 
D. System Setup 
The system setup is shown in Fig. 2. All ophthalmic 
procedures were performed under high magnification due to 
the small anatomy of the eye. Accordingly, all peeling 
procedures in this study were performed under 16X 
magnification, provided by a Zeiss OPMI 1 surgical 
microscope. Deflection of each FBG is measured by a 
Micron Optics SM130-700 optical sensing interrogator 
which detects the wavelength rejected on each FBG at 1 kHz 
at a resolution of 0.25nm. Video of the peeling procedures 
was acquired at 30Hz through two Flea2 1024x768 cameras 
from PointGrey for post-procedural review.    
III. METHODS 
A.  Position Control 
A position control system similar to that used by Becker 
et al. [12] is implemented. This experiment utilizes a more 
recent iteration of the Micron device with increased degrees 
of freedom and manipulation range. The position feedback 
control of the hybrid position/force control consists of a 
lowpass Butterworth filter with a corner of 1.5 Hz, used to 
filter hand tremor. A shelving filter can also be implemented 
which scales the user input by a factor of 1/3 in order to 
increase positioning accuracy. Further details on the position 
loop and Micron can be found in MacLachlan et al. [19]. 
Similar to Becker et al. [12], the shelving filter was activated 
for the manipulations occurring close to the surface, when 
engaging the membrane edge. After the membrane was 
secure on the sensor hook, the task was continued with only 
the lowpass filter activated. 
B. Force Control 
The control system combines the advantages of Micron’s 
fine position control with the FBG force sensor’s 
millinewton sensing for the task of membrane peeling. As 
Micron improves the positioning accuracy of the surgeon, it 
does not address the issues relating to the lack of tactile 
feedback and depth perception during peeling operations. 
The addition of force sensing enhances the surgeon’s tactile 
feedback and depth perception by detecting the tip’s 
interaction with structures in the eye and responding with a 
tip movement in the opposing direction. A hybrid 
position/force control system is implemented to accomplish 
this goal [20]. The block diagram of the system is shown in 
Fig. 3. When no force is present, the system operates under 
position control. When a force is sensed that exceeds any of 
the constraints an error is generated in the force control loop 
which is then processed and added as a corrective term to the 
output position.  
1)  The Varying Task Frame 
Due to the unique handheld nature of Micron, position 
control is executed in the fixed coordinate system of the 
ASAP tracking device. This provides a stationary reference 
frame for orienting the handpiece and executing tip position 
control relative to the handpiece [19]. However, a fixed 
frame is not conducive to interacting with a changing 
surgical environment. It is often the case that the peeling 
direction is dependent on the orientation of the instrument’s 
hooked tip. For this reason a more intuitive frame was 
chosen which aligns the force frame with respect to the 
instrument tip orientation. This conveniently provides the 
benefit of allowing the coordinate axes to closely align with 
the current peeling direction. A least squares calibration is 
performed to align the force frame with the tip frame. 
Figures in this paper that display forces are presented in this 
calibrated coordinate frame, shown in Fig. 1.  
2)  Anisotropic Force Control 
Anisotropic force control is implemented to minimize the 
force applied to the retina and improve surgeon performance 
during peeling operations. Soft and hard constraints were 
implemented in the peel direction to attenuate tip movement 
if the force exceeded the soft threshold. The error is then 
scaled linearly to the hard constraint, after which the control 
loop is in full effect according to (1).  
774
  
 
Fig. 6.  A sample 16-second data set for peeling trials under hybrid position/force control and also under position control only. The hard constraint is 
shown as the horizontal dashed line in both the upper and lower plot. The hard constraint is set for 1 mN and -1 mN in the X axis and 7 mN and 0 mN in 
the Y axis. A scaling mode is active in position control during the initial engaging of the membrane; afterwards the position control uses a lowpass filter to 
improve precision. The force control is uniformly active or inactive depending on the trial performed. The above data has been lowpass filtered at 40 Hz 
to remove noise. 
 
 
Fig. 5.  The peeling process is shown above a) PDMS layer b) 
Sorbothane® rubber c) FBG sensor with a hooked tip for peeling. The tip 
is inserted beneath the PDMS layer and slowly lifted to separate the 
PDMS from the rubber. 
 
e
c
 = e(F-C
s
)/(C
h
-C
s
)? ????
Where the soft constraint, C
s
, and hard constraint, C
h
, 
scale the error, e, based on the force measurement, F, to 
yield a corrected error, e
c
, used for determining the 
appropriate position offset.  
Along the Y axis a soft constraint of 4 mN and a hard 
constraint of 7 mN was used in the direction of the peel 
(away from the retinal surface) based on tactile perception 
data [14] and the force threshold for tearing [8]. Only a hard 
constraint of 0 mN was set in the direction opposite from 
peeling (i.e., into the retinal surface). This low threshold is 
intended to minimize any force if the instrument comes into 
contact with the retina. 
In the lateral direction (X axis), force control was scaled 
linearly from a soft constraint of 0 mN to a hard constraint of 
1 mN. In previous experimental peeling trials a level of 1 
mN was found to be sufficient for making minor changes in 
the direction of the peel during the task. For more severe 
directional changes, the tool tip would be rotated to realign 
the Y axis with the peeling direction and prevent the 
membrane from slipping off the hooked tip.  
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
Two experiments were conducted to validate the 
performance of the hybrid position/force control system. The 
first characterizes the system performance under clamped 
settings and rigidly controlled conditions. The second tests 
the system under more realistic operating conditions in an 
artificial model. Both experiments were performed using the 
same tuning parameters, with the exception of the soft and 
hard constraints set to zero during the system response test. 
1)  The System Response 
To test the efficacy of the force control in relation to real 
operating conditions the system is characterized using a 
position stimulus. As force is a function of the tip position 
this demonstrates the effectiveness of the force control to 
servo the tip appropriately for avoiding contact with 
structures and minimizing the force input.  
The attenuation of the system at a range of frequencies 
was measured by clamping the handle of Micron to fixate it 
and then advancing the FBG tip into a rubber pad to fixate it 
as well, allowing force measurements to be correlated to any 
position disturbance. A sinusoidal position stimulus was then 
input with a peak to peak amplitude of 200 µm for 20 
logarithmically spaced frequencies ranging from 0.1 to 10 
Hz. The response at each frequency was sampled with a 
minimum n=2. Actual displacement of the tip was 
a 
b 
c 
775
  
 
Fig. 7.  RMS peeling force during position-controlled and hybrid 
position/force-controlled peeling tasks. There is a significant reduction in 
force by 42% along the Y axis; however, the X axis shows very little 
improvement, possibly due to the linear nature of the peeling task 
performed. 
 
Fig. 8.  Maximum peeling force during position-controlled and 
hybrid position/force-controlled peeling tasks. There is a significant 
reduction in maximum force along the Y axis by 52%, however the X 
axis is nearly identical, which is most likely due to the linear nature of 
the peeling task. 
 
 
 
determined using ASAP and compared to the stimulus input 
in order to generate the system response shown in Fig. 4. The 
gain is shown to be -20 dB up to a corner of 0.5 Hz. Since 
most operations in the eye are slow and deliberate due to the 
delicate nature of the surgery, most voluntary movements 
occur at or below a frequency of 2 Hz [21], at which the 
input is still attenuated by at least 12 dB.     
2)  Artificial Membrane Peeling 
To validate the system in actual peeling tasks, an 
artificial retinal membrane model was constructed for 
repeatability. The model consisted of Sorbothane® rubber 
and a layer of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). Sorbothane® 
rubber was specifically designed to mimic the properties of 
human tissue [22]. Although originally designed to mimic 
skin, it is a viscoelastic polymer that has properties similar to 
other biological tissue such as the retina. Sorbothane® 
rubber provides the most realistic artificial surface beneath 
the PDMS to mimic the response of the retina and subretinal 
tissues in vivo.  
Other investigations into membrane peeling have used 
materials such as bandage strips and the inner shell 
membrane of raw eggs [23], or Glad® ClingWrap [24]. 
However, with surgeon feedback, it was determined that a 
thin layer of PDMS provided a best approximation to the 
epiretinal membrane and ILM. This also eliminates 
variability of biological tissue, allowing more repeatable 
results to be acquired among trials.  
The PDMS was spin-coated onto wafers to a thickness of 
approximately 30 µm. The PDMS was then sectioned into 
strips 5.2 mm in width and transferred to the Sorbothane® 
rubber surface for peeling. As the force required to peel each 
strip is a function of the contact area between the PDMS and 
the rubber, the thickness of the strips was determined as to 
mimic the forces of membrane peeling in vivo.  
The peeling procedure, shown in Fig. 5 then involved 
engaging an edge of the PDMS membrane by sliding the 
hook in between the membrane and rubber then lifting. This 
portion was performed under the scaling mode. After an 
edge had been successfully lifted, the membrane was peeled 
from the rubber surface with only lowpass filtering active. 
Engaging the membrane was a highly variable process; as a 
result, the decision to deactivate scaling mode was 
determined by the user once a secure engagement was 
achieved. This procedure was repeated with and without 
force control, for a total of 15 trials under each condition. A 
16-second sample data set for each test condition can be 
viewed in Fig. 6, in which the data are lowpass-filtered at 40 
Hz to remove noise.  
To evaluate the effectiveness of hybrid position/force 
control for peeling, the engaging and peeling tasks needed to 
be separated for the Y axis. Since engaging the membrane 
occurs in the range of 1-2 mN, an upper limit of 2 mN was 
imposed to separate the tasks. Once separated, the RMS 
force across all peeling trials was calculated for each 
condition. Similarly, the maximum peeling force was 
selected from each trial and the RMS maximum force was 
calculated for each trial condition.  
V. RESULTS 
From the tests of hybrid position/force control under both 
under clamped and handheld conditions, the displacement of 
the tip is attenuated by 20 dB up to a corner frequency of 0.5 
Hz. The attenuation then decreases logarithmically until 
776
  
there is zero attenuation at roughly 15 Hz. As the typical 
human hand-eye feedback loop operates in the frequency 
range below 2 Hz [21], this attenuation is acceptable for 
compensating under normal operating conditions. In 
addition, when the scaling mode is active near the retina, the 
operator’s movements are inherently slower due to the 
reduced speed enforced by the position control. By reducing 
the speed, the scaling mode moves the operator movements 
into a lower-frequency band of the force control, where 
higher attenuation is achieved.  
During handheld trials hybrid position/force control 
demonstrated a reduction in both RMS and maximum force 
in the Y axis. The RMS force across trials was reduced by 
42%, as shown in Fig. 7. The maximum force was reduced 
52%, as shown in Fig. 8. There was no significant reduction 
in the X axis in either the RMS force or maximum force 
across trials.  
VI. DISCUSSION 
An extension of the Micron control system has been 
described using a hybrid position/force control approach for 
membrane peeling. Hand tremor is reduced using the 
position loop while providing enhanced position control 
when below the specified force thresholds. When the force 
thresholds are exceeded, the applied force is limited by the 
force control loop.  This method was found to reduce the 
RMS force by 42% and maximum force by 52% along the Y 
axis. Interestingly, the X axis showed no significant 
improvement during the experimental trials. This is most 
likely due to the linear path followed during the trials. In 
reality the goal is to remove a circular patch of membrane 
around the macular hole. In this situation it becomes much 
more necessary to control the direction of the peel by 
applying forces orthogonal to the peel direction. 
We propose to continue this work by testing in more 
realistic models, both ex vivo and in vivo, and by extension 
of the force control to three degrees of freedom when a 
suitable 3DOF FBG force sensor becomes available. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Davson, The Eye. New York: Academic Press, 1962. 
[2] T. M. Johnson and M. W. Johnson, “Epiretinal membrane,” in 
Ophthalmology, 3rd ed., M. Yanoff and J. Duker, Eds. St. Louis: 
Mosby, 2007, pp. 686–690. 
[3] H. L. Brooks, “Macular hole surgery with and without internal 
limiting membrane peeling,” Ophthalmology, vol. 107, no. 10, pp. 
1939–1948, 2000. 
[4] U. C. Christensen, “Value of internal limiting membrane peeling in 
surgery for idiopathic macular hole and the correlation between 
function and retinal morphology,” Acta Opthalmologica, vol. 87, no. 
thesis2, pp. 1–23, 2009. 
[5] T. S. Wells, S. Yang, R. A. MacLachlan, J. T. Handa, P. L. Gehlbach, 
and C. N. Riviere, “Comparison of baseline tremor under various 
microsurgical conditions,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Syst. Man 
Cybern., 2013, pp. 1482-1487. 
[6] C. Haritoglou, C. A. Gass, M. Schaumberger, A. Gandorfer, and M. 
W. Ulbig, “Long-term follow-up after macular hole surgery with 
internal limiting membrane peeling,” Am. J. Ophthalmol., vol. 134, 
no. 5, pp. 661–666, 2002. 
[7] Y. Ida, N. Sugita, T. Ueta, Y. Tamaki, K. Tanimoto, and M. 
Mitsuishi, “Microsurgical robotic system for vitreoretinal surgery,” 
Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 27–34, 2012. 
[8] A. Uneri, M. Balicki, J. T. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor, and I. 
Iordachita, “New Steady-Hand Eye Robot with micro-force sensing 
for vitreoretinal surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Robot. 
Biomechatron., 2010, pp. 814–819. 
[9] S. Yang, T. S. Wells, R. A. MacLachlan, and C. N. Riviere, 
“Performance of a 6-degree-of-freedom active microsurgical 
manipulator in handheld tasks,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. 
Med. Biol. Soc., 2013, pp. 5670–5673. 
[10] M. Balicki, A. Uneri, I. Iordachita, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, and R. 
Taylor, “Micro-force sensing in robot assisted membrane peeling for 
vitreoretinal surgery,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 6363, pp. 303–
310, 2010. 
[11] I. Kuru, B. Gonenc, M. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, 
and I. Iordachita, “Force sensing micro-forceps for robot assisted 
retinal surgery.,” in Proc. Annu. Int. Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. 
Soc., 2012, pp. 1401–1404. 
[12] B. C. Becker, R. A. MacLachlan, L. A. Lobes, G. D. Hager, and C. N. 
Riviere, “Vision-based control of a handheld surgical 
micromanipulator with virtual fixtures,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, 
no. 3, pp. 674–683, Jun. 2013. 
[13] W. T. Latt, R. C. Newton, M. Visentini-Scarzanella, C. J. Payne, D. P. 
Noonan, J. Shang, and G.-Z. Yang, “A hand-held instrument to 
maintain steady tissue contact during probe-based confocal laser 
endomicroscopy,” IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 
2694–703, Sep. 2011. 
[14] P. K. Gupta, P. S. Jensen, and E. de Juan Jr., “Surgical forces and 
tactile perception during retinal microsurgery,” Lect. Notes Comput. 
Sci., vol. 1679, pp. 1218–1225, 1999. 
[15] R. A. MacLachlan and C. N. Riviere, “High-speed microscale optical 
tracking using digital frequency-domain multiplexing,” IEEE Trans 
Instrum Meas, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1991–2001, Jun. 2009. 
[16] P. J. Berkelman, L. L. Whitcomb, R. H. Taylor, and P. Jensen, “A 
miniature microsurgical instrument tip force sensor for enhanced 
force feedback during robot-assisted manipulation,” IEEE Trans. 
Robot. Autom., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 917–921, 2003. 
[17] A. D. Jagtap and C. N. Riviere, “Applied force during vitreoretinal 
microsurgery with handheld instruments,” in Proc. 26th Annu. Int. 
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 2004, pp. 2771–2773. 
[18] Z. Sun, M. Balicki, J. Kang, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor, and I. 
Iordachita, “A sub-millemetric, 0.25 mN resolution fully integrated 
fiber-optic force sensing tool for retinal microsurgery,” Int. J. 
Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 383–390, Jun. 2009. 
[19] R. A. MacLachlan, B. C. Becker, J. Cuevas Tabares, G. Podnar, L. A. 
Lobes, Jr., and C. N. Riviere, “Micron: an actively stabilized 
handheld tool for microsurgery,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 1, 
pp. 195–212, 2012. 
[20] J. J. Craig and M. H. Raibert, “A systematic method of hybrid 
position/force control of a manipulator,” COMPSAC 79 Proceedings 
Computer Software and The IEEE Computer Society Third 
International Applications Conference, 1979, pp. 446–451. 
[21] B. Kutchen, K. Henning, H. Rake, and O. Schafer, “Frequency 
response of the human controller for various processes and stochastic 
test signals,” Biol. Cybern., vol. 27, pp. 33–39, 1977. 
[22] C. VanIngen-Dunn, T. R. Hurley, and S. Street, “Development of a 
humanlike flesh material for prosthetic limbs,” in Proc. Annu. Int. 
Conf. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., 1993, pp. 1313–1314. 
[23] B. Gonenc, M. A. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, C. N. Riviere, R. H. 
Taylor, F. Member, and I. Iordachita, “Preliminary evaluation of a 
micro-force sensing handheld robot for vitreoretinal surgery,” in IEEE 
Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., 2012, pp. 4125–4130. 
[24] B. C. Becker, R. A. Maclachlan, L. A. Lobes, and C. N. Riviere, 
“Vision-based retinal membrane peeling with a handheld robot,” in 
IEEE Proc. Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., 2012, pp. 1075–1080.  
777
