Enhanced Computer-Assisted Laser Microsurgeries
with a “Virtual Microscope” based surgical system
Nikhil Deshpande, Jesús Ortiz, Darwin G. Caldwell, and Leonardo S. Mattos
Department of Advanced Robotics, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Genova, Italy
Email: {nikhil.deshpande, jesus.ortiz, darwin.caldwell, leonardo.demattos}@iit.it
Abstract—Ergonomic and human-centered approaches are in-
creasingly important in the design of surgeon-machine interfaces.
In the case of microsurgeries, the procedures suffer from suscepti-
bility to variation in surgeon skill and equipment characteristics.
This paper presents a novel, computer-assisted surgical interface
for laser-based microsurgeries, called the “RALP Surgical
System”. With the system, surgeries can be performed with
improved safety and precision using a three-part architecture:
(i) a 3D viewer device providing stereoscopic visualization; (ii) a
graphics stylus that controls a motorized micromanipulator for
laser aiming and activation; and (iii) a conﬁguration interface
allowing system setup and modiﬁcations in real-time. The system
combines the advantages of a computer-assisted platform while
respecting the visualization and manipulation requirements of
a microsurgical procedure. The features include intraoperative
planning for automatic laser incisions and ablations as well as
safety regions based on virtual overlays in the surgeon’s ﬁeld-of-
view. A comparative evaluation of the proposed system against
the traditional system points to the clear superiority of the new
interface. The quantitative comparison shows that the proposed
interface is safer, more precise, and better controlled. The
qualitative comparison demonstrates that the interface is easier
to use, easier to learn, and has a minimal training requirement.
The technological advances presented here shall lead to enhanced
interfaces, increasing the capacity of surgical systems through
user-centered design approaches.
Index Terms—Computer-assisted surgery, virtual microscope,
stylus-based manipulation, laser microsurgeries.
I. INTRODUCTION
Surgical interventions require a high degree of capability
(ability to carry out complex surgical tasks), efﬁciency (execut-
ing surgeries with minimal resources), and safety (for both the
patient and the surgeon). Through increased task precision, re-
duced tremor in gestures, timely execution of repetitive tasks,
among other features, surgeons see robot-assisted surgeries
as a key part of the modern surgical infrastructure [1]. Yet,
the quality and efﬁciency of the surgical outcome depends
on the characteristics of the robotic surgical equipment itself
[2]. This is especially true in the case of microsurgeries, such
as phonomicrosurgery, where the surgical areas, within which
the surgeons have to dissect and treat the abnormalities, are
small (the order ofmm). The ﬁner the surgical procedure, the
greater is the dependency on dexterity and skill of the surgeon.
These, in turn, depend on the controllability and precision of
the surgical system. The surgeon may require to undergo a
long training process on the robotic surgical system to achieve
the requisite quality of surgical outcome [1], [2].
Surgical microscope Laryngoscope
Laser micromanipulator
  Surgical 
  Area
Laser Beam
(400 mm distance)
Fig. 1. Example of the Laser Phonomicrosurgery surgical system.
Laser Phonomicrosurgery (LP) is a state-of-the-art micro-
surgical procedure for the treatment of vocal cord abnormali-
ties. The traditional LP system currently used in the Operating
Room (OR) (Fig. 1) consists of: (i) a surgical microscope
providing visualization; (ii) a mechanical micromanipulator
used to manually aim the laser beam; and (iii) a separate foot-
switch to activate the laser. Evidently, such a setup requires
the surgeon to have high psycho-motor skills to overcome
challenges of hand-eye-foot coordination, poor ergonomics,
sub-optimal visualization, and difﬁcult surgical site access at a
large distance (400mm), among others [3]. Several improve-
ments have been proposed to this setup, both commercial
and research-based. One of the main improvements is the
ability to execute high-quality incisions with pre-programmed
patterns using motorized laser scanning mirrors [4], [5]. Com-
mercially available devices also offer such enhancements: the
Lumenis AcuBlade, the KLS Martin SoftScan, and the DEKA
HiScan. However, these devices have done little to enhance
the surgeon’s usage experience, since the poor ergonomics
and discomfort still persist. Figure 1 shows the state-of-the-
art surgical setup in LP, using the AcuBlade system. Research
has found the system to not only have inferior precision and
repeatability, but also to be difﬁcult to use and learn [3], [6].
This paper presents a redesign of the laser-based microsur-
gical interface that replaces the traditional setup with a novel,
computer-assisted surgical system. The main components of
the new robot-assisted microsurgical system are: (i) a 3D
viewer device acting as the virtual microscope providing
the surgeon with real-time, high-deﬁnition (HD), stereoscopic
visualization of the surgical area. The 3D viewer is held-in-
place for the surgeon to look through, similar to a surgical
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4194
microscope; (ii) a graphics stylus which controls a motor-
ized laser micromanipulator, allowing the surgeon to perform
operations with greater precision; and (iii) a separate touch-
screen monitor providing an interface for system conﬁguration,
surgical work-ﬂow deﬁnition, and supplementary visualization
in the OR. As is observed, this setup combines the features of
any computer-assisted system (i.e., improved precision, safety
and controllability) with the visualization and conﬁguration
requirements of a delicate microsurgical procedure. The fea-
tures and beneﬁts include: (i) the augmentation of surgeon
skills through scaling of gestures and magniﬁed visualization;
(ii) Elimination of extensive equipment training due to the
intuitive stylus-based manipulation; and (iii) the possibility of
intraoperative planning and virtual overlays to assist in the
surgeon during surgery. The concept is shown in Fig. 2.
Graphics Stylus
Virtual Microscope
Configuration UI
Touchscreen
Forceps
Laryngoscope
Augmented View
Fig. 2. The RALP Surgical System concept.
II. RELATED WORK
The recognition that interfaces (and human factors) play a
major role in the success and quality of laser-based micro-
surgeries has driven recent research into the use of different
surgical systems for laryngeal laser procedures. Solares and
Strome [7] and Desai et al. [8] demonstrated the utility of
the da Vinci system [9] in microsurgeries by coupling the
new CO
2
ﬁber laser to one of its tool tips. Their research
emphasized the need for a relook at current laser aiming
precision, resolution and scanning capabilities [8]. The work of
Giallo [10], with motorized micromanipulator aiming control,
suffered from calibration and scaling difﬁculties and poor
reproducibility. Tang et al. [11] proposed a writing-based
interface for controlling laser aiming in robot-assisted laser
laparoscopy. Their research demonstrated the positive impact
a more intuitive surgeon interface can have on the accuracy
of incisions, the overall stability, and training requirements.
Similarly, Reinisch et al. [12] demonstrated the control of a
laser ablation system via a graphical user interface that allowed
the selection of aiming points within a screenshot of the target
area.
LP is the focus of novel research at the Istituto Italiano
di Tecnologia (IIT), in the context of the European project
- RALP. Mattos et al. [6] presented a novel surgeon inter-
face design, called the “virtual scalpel” system. This system
replaces the manual micromanipulator interface with a mo-
torized one, which is controlled through a graphics stylus.
A monitor with live video of the surgical area provides
visualization to the surgeon. The immediate advantage was that
both aiming and activation of the laser were controlled by the
stylus [3], [6]. Yet, the key limitations noted were: (i) the lack
of stereoscopic visualization of the surgical area, and (ii) the
sub-optimal location of the interface (away from the patient).
This restricted the surgeon’s ability to gauge the surgical
margins and constrained the in-surgery tissue manipulation
capability.
The research in this paper continues the improvement
into the ergonomic and objective aspects of the LP surgical
interface design. The introduced combination of motorized
manipulation and 3D visualization makes full use of the
surgeons’ skills along with augmenting the surgeon’s ﬁeld-
of-view with real-time planning and safety features. The
technology introduced in this paper can be adapted to the
larger domain of laser surgeries, improving the state-of-the-
art in robot-assisted surgical interfaces.
III. THERALP SURGICAL SYSTEM CONCEPT
Through close interactions with the surgeons and their
subjective and analytical feedback [3], two aspects were un-
derstood to be key in the surgeons’ preferences in technology
for microsurgeries:
1) Proximity to the patient: required for ﬁne adjustments
and tissue manipulation to be carried out during the
surgery.
2) Enhanced visualization: required to better understand the
surgical margins and planning of the surgery.
CO2 Laser 
Arm – laser 
input path
Surgical 
Microscope
2 HD Cameras 
attached to the 
microscope 
viewing area lens
Motorized Laser 
micromanipulator adapted 
to the surgical setup
Traditional Laser 
micromanipulator as 
a separate control
Surgical 
area
(b) (c)
(a)
Fig. 3. Current hardware setup of the RALP Surgical System.
(a) SONY HMZ-T2 3D Viewer; (b) Modiﬁed 3D Viewer as Virtual Micro-
scope; (c) The surgical setup with the HD cameras and manipulator attached
to the surgical microscope.
The RALP system is designed to incorporate the above
aspects in the system while providing all the important features
of a computer-assisted surgical system. The motivation was to
4195
allow surgeons the precise aiming control provided by motor-
ized laser manipulation, along with the ergonomic advantages
of using a graphics stylus, over the real-time 3D visualization
of the surgical site. Following are the main elements of the
new system:
1) Motorized Micromanipulator: This component, intro-
duced in [13], was designed to be attached to the tradi-
tional LP equipment and is installed on its laser entry
port. The ﬁnal device, based on a fast steering tip/tilt
mirror (FSM), is fully computer-controlled and able to
realize accurate scanning motions at frequencies up to
200Hz. It provides a 4m positioning accuracy and a
40mm x 40mm range at the typical 400mm operating
distance [13]. This allows the physician to realize long
cuts with precision, uniformity, and consistency.
2) Graphics Stylus with Tablet: The WACOM Bamboo Pen
andTouch tablet was chosen for laser aiming control and
as a mouse input for intraoperative planning and system
conﬁguration (Fig. 6 - Top Left). It can be controlled
using a stylus pen or ﬁnger touch. The stylus touching
the tablet activates the laser.
3) Virtual Microscope: This component preserves the close
proximity of the surgeon with the patient while pro-
viding real-time HD stereoscopic visualization of the
surgical area. The conﬁguration for this component is
a two-tier structure:
a) Stereoscopic video acquisition is realized through
two HD cameras (Prosilica GT1910 GigE Vision
- 1080p) attached to the surgical microscope, as
shown in Fig. 3c.
b) A 3D head-mount display (SONY HMZ-T2 -720p)
device, suitably modiﬁed as shown in Fig. 3b, is
used to display the acquired video. The device
has laterally adjustable viewing lenses to adapt
to different facial contours, and has a forehead
rest which turns the display on/off. The device is
ﬁxed to the surgical platform with an adjustable
arm (Fig. 2). This modiﬁcation presents another
key advantage - it does not restrict the surgeon’s
view to the surgical area, effectively avoiding an
isolation of the surgeon from the operating room
environment.
4) Conﬁguration Interface: This component is used for sys-
tem conﬁguration, surgical work-ﬂow deﬁnition, safety
alarm messages, as well as supplementary surgical site
visualization. Two important factors led to adopting
a separate touchscreen interface for the conﬁguration
panel:
a) Since the surgeon’s visual ﬁeld is through the
virtual microscope, it was deemed unﬁt to crowd
the visual area with conﬁguration information.
b) The necessity was identiﬁed to allow a surgical
assistant to make the changes to the conﬁguration
settings without requiring the surgeon’s interven-
tion for it.
Additionally, a larger screen for all the settings, mes-
sages, and the supplementary surgical area view pro-
duces less visual strain. Refer Fig. 4.
Messages Microscope image Categories Options
Information User Input
Safe Area
Dangerous 
Area
Ablation 
Planning
Incision 
Planning
Fig. 4. Conﬁguration Interface and representation of a surgical assistant
interacting with it through a touch screen.
The information is presented on the left side of the interface and the user input areas
are placed on the right side. Each category opens a speciﬁc options panel.
The assistive features are also shown overlayed on the microscope image.
This arrangement provides the following beneﬁts: (i) the
custom-designed, motorized, laser micromanipulator improves
aiming accuracy; (ii) the assistive teleoperation and automation
improve the precision, controllability, and safety; and (iii)
the separation of the surgical and conﬁguration interfaces
decouples the two activities and allows them to be carried
out independently. Additionally, as a research platform, the
virtual microscope enables research into 3D surgical planning
and 3D laser control.
A. System Architecture
Figure 5 shows the overall architecture of the RALP
surgical system concept. As is evident, the surgeon remains
in control of the entire system, while different components
of the system assist in the surgical tasks. A user interface
software controls the entire system and interfaces with the
various devices in the system.
The virtual microscope and the conﬁguration interface com-
bine to provide the key features of the system:
1) The surgeon performs the surgical tasks in the virtual
microscope interface. The conﬁguration interface allows
to choose between the different task categories based on
the requirement of the surgeon.
4196
Surgeon Assistant/Nurse
Foot
Switch 
Graphics Tablet Virtual Microscope 
Main UI 
Touch Screen
Configuration UI
Operation Mode
Virtual
Scalpel
Safety
Regions
Configuration
(cameras,
laser, etc.)
Tools
(Calibration,
etc.)
Incision
Planning
Ablation
Planning
Control Computer
Commands processing
Fast Steering Mirror (FSM)
Surgical
Laser
Cameras
Safety
Interlock 
Surgical Microscope
Surgical Site
Fig. 5. The RALP surgical system architecture.
2) Different parts of the conﬁguration screen are allocated
for different categories. These include: (i) in-surgery
messages for information and alarms, (ii) different as-
sistive features, (iii) tools for system calibration and
hardware conﬁguration, etc. The surgeon or surgical
assistants can monitor and alter the different parts in-
dependently.
3) The assistive features in the surgeon’s ﬁeld-of-view are
(Refer Fig. 4):
a) Virtual Scalpel: Precise aiming and incision with
the laser using the stylus and tablet interface.
b) Intraoperative path-planning: The stylus can deﬁne
virtual scan patterns in the surgical area. This
allows incision planning for automatic execution
of pre-deﬁned paths as well as ablation planning
for ablation of pre-deﬁned regions of the surgical
area.
c) Safety region overlays: The stylus can deﬁne the
regions within the surgical area where the laser is
either: (i) active only inside the region (Safe area),
or (ii) inactive inside the region (Dangerous area).
The high-level commands generated by the surgeon con-
trolling the graphics stylus, or inputs from the conﬁguration
interface, are processed by the software and converted to: (i)
low-level motion commands for the motorized manipulator us-
ing the calibration parameters, (ii) augmented reality overlays
in the video feed, and/or (iii) system conﬁguration change
inputs. The control software, based in ROS, ensures high
repeatability and consistency. The conventional footswitch and
a hardware interlock are also included to provide an additional
level of safety by deactivating the laser when not in use or
when commanded by the software system. System calibration
involves transforming the coordinates of the laser spot from
image space (surgeon’s display) to the coordinate system of the
motorized laser micromanipulator. The procedure from [13] is
adopted here - the laser spot is moved automatically to a pre-
deﬁned set of locations and at each location the stylus input
locations are recorded. The calibration patterns can be pre-
deﬁned in an independent conﬁguration ﬁle so they can be
used for different magniﬁcations, optics, input devices, and
laser controllers.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
To demonstrate the enhanced usability and performance
of the RALP surgical system, it was compared with the
traditional laser control interface, as shown in Fig. 6, Top-
Left. A two-stage procedure was adopted for comparison:
(i) a quantitative assessment using the trajectory following
trials, introduced in [3], [14], and (ii) a qualitative assessment
through a questionnaire. The combination of the two stages
provided for a clear classiﬁcation of the two examined surgeon
interfaces. The trials were performed with 10 non-medical
subjects - the subjects had no prior experience with either
interfaces. The trials were performed in two sets, ﬁrst using the
RALP system and then the traditional system. This sequence
eliminated the possibility of any beneﬁt for theRALP system
through learning bias.
The experiments consisted of two different tasks: (i) sets
of trajectory following exercises through laser-tracing, and
(ii) ablating chicken tissue through randomized dot patterns.
The trajectories, randomized sets of C-curves, S-curves, and
straight lines were stamped on plaster blocks for easier anal-
ysis and reproducibility. The ablation task involved ablating
the tissue at pre-deﬁned, randomized spots marked on the
chicken tissue. The subjects were asked to follow the spot
ablation one-by-one, in anti-clockwise direction. Both the
tasks were representative of real surgical actions and allowed
the assessment of the accuracy and precision of the interfaces.
Figure 6 shows the experimental setup. Custom software was
written to analyze the data from the experiments.
Traditional
setup
?RALP surgical
setup
Chicken T argets Plaster T argets
35 mm
27 mm
10 mm
10 mm
Fig. 6. Experimental Setup. The ﬁgure shows the targets used for the
experimental tasks. The plaster blocks have randomized sets of trajectories
and are clearly marked by theCO
2
laser. The chicken tissue are marked with
randomized spots for the ablation task.
4197
A. Quantitative Assessment
The quantitative assessment consisted of two different eval-
uations:
1) System Accuracy: This was assessed through the
trajectory-following task on pre-deﬁned random shapes (Fig.
6). The root-mean-square-error (RMSE) and the maximum er-
ror (Error
max
) metrics were used for comparison (introduced
in [14]). Considering the number of subjects and the number
of shapes traced by each of them (6), there are 60 data points
for each of the metrics in each of the conditions (traditional
and RALP). Table I summarizes the t-test analysis for the
two accuracy metrics. The two conditions show a statistically
signiﬁcant difference in performance. The RALP condition
permits a signiﬁcantly more accurate performance than the
traditional condition.
 RMSE: The virtual microscope condition permits easier
trajectory following with the laser than the traditional
condition.
 Error
max
: The virtual microscope condition permits bet-
ter control of the laser than the traditional condition. It
helps avoid large deviations from the desired trajectories.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF AVERAGE VALUES OF THE ACCURACY METRICS (MM).
Traditional RALP
condition condition t p
mean sd mean sd
RMSE 0.65 0.11 0.36 0.14 4.748 2e-4
Errormax 1.38 0.25 0.68 0.23 6.309 6e-6
The above metrics are directly related to the operational
safety and efﬁciency of the interfaces. A high value for the
RMSE gives an account of how far the laser-traced shape is
from the desired shape. This implies that the laser is active in
non-desired areas. In case of real surgeries, this would mean
that the laser is ablating more than the desired area of the
tissue, may be healthy tissue. On these parameters, theRALP
interface consistently shows closer to ideal values, much more
so than the traditional interface. It is evident that users perform
better with theRALP interface in general. This aspect is also
reﬂected in the execution time evaluation and the qualitative
evaluation to follow.
2) Execution Time: To understand the effect of the two
interfaces on the actual times for trial completion, the durations
of the trials were recorded for both, the chicken tissue ablation
task and the trajectory following task (6 shapes). The results
of the t-test analysis are summarized in the Table II.
TABLE II
COMPARISON OF TIMES FOR TRIAL COMPLETION (SECONDS).
Traditional RALP
Task condition condition t p
mean sd mean sd
Trajectory Task 7.58 2.29 4.03 1.58 3.836 1e-3
Tissue Ablation 30.50 7.12 21.60 6.42 2.936 0.008
There is a signiﬁcant difference for the trial times in the
two conditions. The subjects in the traditional condition take
a signiﬁcantly longer time to complete the trials than the
subjects in the RALP condition. This is an interesting result
which shows that the RALP condition allows the trajectory
following tasks to be performed faster and more precisely than
the traditional condition.
B. Qualitative Assessment
For these evaluations, the System Usability Scale (SUS)
questionnaire was utilized, as described in [3]. SUS allows the
evaluation of surgical technology in terms of general usability.
Upon receiving the SUS questionnaire, the subject must read
each statement and evaluate whether and how much he/she
agrees with it. The questions are listed in Table III.
The questionnaires clearly demonstrated the different level
of usability assigned by the subjects to each interface (tradi-
tional vs.RALP). A t-test analysis showed that the difference
between the SUS global scores for the two conditions was
statistically signiﬁcant with p = 0.0462. This implied that the
subjects attributed a much higher level of overall usability to
theRALP interface (m = 82.00, sd = 8.16) than the traditional
interface (m = 74.67, sd = 7.11), on a 100-point scale. This
is an expected result. In general usability, the RALP system
is perceived as a device which is easier to use and adapt to
surgical tasks.
TABLE III
COMPARISON OF SUS SCORES
Sr. Questions Traditional RALP % betterment
No. condition condition forRALP
mean mean on Traditional
1. I think that I would like to 75.00 75.00 0.00
use this system frequently.
2. I found the system 73.33 91.67 25.00
unnecessarily complex
3. I felt very conﬁdent 65.00 65.00 0.00
using the system.
4. I found the various
functions in this system 81.67 80.00 -2.04
were well integrated.
5. I thought the system 61.67 76.67 24.32
was easy to use.
6. I thought there was too
much inconsistency in 81.67 85.00 4.08
this system.
7. I found the system very 80.00 85.00 6.25
cumbersome to use.
8. I would imagine that most
people would learn to use 78.33 86.67 10.64
this system very quickly.
9. I think that I would need
the support of a technical 70.00 83.33 19.05
person to be able to use
this system.
10. I needed to learn a lot of
things before I could get 80.00 91.67 14.58
going with this system.
Global Score 74.67 82.00 9.82
It shows that generally subjects assign much better usability
4198
scores for theRALP condition over the traditional condition.
Further analysis on four speciﬁc sub-scales of the SUS shows
the precise improvements:
1) Sub-scale 2 (25% better): The users of RALP ﬁnd the
system simpler and more uniform.
2) Sub-scale 5 (24% better): TheRALP interface is easier
to use than the traditional interface.
3) Sub-scale 9 (19% better): The users of the RALP
interface would require less support by an expert than
the users of traditional system.
4) Sub-scale 10 (15% better): The users of RALP would
require to learn less processes than the users of tradi-
tional system.
The requirement of consistency and uniform integration in
the system is taken as an important feedback. Towards this end,
the latency in the video acquisition and display is an important
factor in usability considerations. To evaluate the latency,
time-stamped data was recorded over 10 seconds of system
operation. A maximum latency of 66:6ms was registered for
the visualization of the surgical video. This is more than 30%
lower than the generally acceptable latency value of 100ms.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSION
In this paper, a novel computer-assisted robotic system, the
RALP Surgical System, was presented. It was created to
provide improved precision, safety, and better ergonomics for
laser-based microsurgery procedures. These objectives were
achieved with the implementation of the RALP concept:
a motorized laser micromanipulator, a stylus-based aiming
controller, a conﬁguration GUI, and a virtual microscope
system based on an HD stereoscopic visualization device.
The system maintains the proximity of the surgeon to the
patient, allowing the same level of interaction between the
surgeon and the surgical team as in traditional LP procedures.
Delicate maneuvers can be accurately performed using a
graphics stylus and a tablet interface, while high-resolution
3D visualization of the surgical area is realized through a
virtual microscope device. Surgical capabilities are augmented
through motion scaling and intuitive laser control. The system
offers the possibility to further improve surgical procedures
through active constraints and intraoperative planning.
A combined quantitative and qualitative evaluation also
clearly demonstrated the superiority of the system. The results
are summarized as follows:
1) TheRALP interface is superior and advantageous with
regards to efﬁcient, accurate, and safe operation.
2) The RALP surgical system shows a much higher
overall usability compared to the traditional interface.
The different sub-scales indicate that it is an “easy to
use” and “easy to learn” interface.
3) The results also imply that the RALP interface takes
much less time and effort to perform the surgical tasks.
In the extension of this research, further studies are planned
in the optimization of the interface through an integrated
framework for evaluation. The technological advances pre-
sented here are currently in the process of joint evaluation
by surgeons and engineers using phantom tissues and ex-vivo
pig larynxes as models. This will provide the groundwork
for further evaluation with animal trials under real surgical
conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the contributions of the entire
RALP research consortium towards the creation of the
RALP surgical system concept. Discussions with our re-
search partners from the FEMTO-ST Institute, Leibniz Uni-
versitat Hannover, CHRU Besançon and UNIGE were also
instrumental in deﬁning the speciﬁcations and characteristics
of the system.
The research leading to these results has received funding
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme
FP7/2007-2013 – Challenge 2 – Cognitive Systems, Interac-
tion, Robotics – under grant agreement RALP - n°288233.
REFERENCES
[1] M. D. O’Toole, K. Bouazza-Marouf, D. Kerr, M. Gooroochurn, and
M. Vloeberghs, “A Methodology for Design and Appraisal of Surgical
Robotic Systems,” Robotica, vol. 28, pp. 297–310, 2010.
[2] S. Serefoglou, W. Lauer, A. Perneczky, T. Lutze, and K. Raderma-
cher, “Multimodal User Interface for a Semi-Robotic Visual Assistance
System for Image Guided Neurosurgery,” in Proc. Computer Aided
Radiology and Surgery, (CARS 2005), vol. 1281, 2005, pp. 624–629.
[3] G. Barresi, N. Deshpande, L. S. Mattos, A. Brogni, L. Guastini,
G. Peretti, and D. G. Caldwell, “Comparative Usability and Perfor-
mance Evaluation of Surgeon Interfaces in Laser Phonomicrosurgery,
(accepted),” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, (IROS 2013), 2013, pp. 3610–3615.
[4] M. Remacle, F. Hassan, D. Cohen, G. Lawson, and M. Delos, “New
Computer-guided Scanner for Improving CO
2
Laser-assisted Microin-
cision,” European Archives of Oto-rhino-laryngology, vol. 262 (2), pp.
113–119, 2005.
[5] M. Remacle, G. Lawson, M.-C. Nollevaux, and M. Delos, “Current State
of Scanning Micromanipulator Applications With the Carbon Dioxide
Laser,” The Annals of Otology, Rhinology & Laryngology, Apr. 2008.
[6] L. S. Mattos, G. Dagnino, G. Becattini, M. Dellepiane, and D. G.
Caldwell, “A Virtual Scalpel System for Computer-Assisted Laser
Microsurgery,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS 2011), Sept. 2011, pp. 1359–1365.
[7] C. A. Solares and M. Strome, “Transoral Robot-assisted CO
2
Laser
Supraglottic Laryngectomy: Experimental and Clinical Data,” The
Laryngoscope, vol. 117(5), pp. 817–820, May 2007.
[8] S. C. Desai, C. K. Sung, D. W. Jang, and E. M. Genden, “Transoral
Robotic Surgery using a Carbon-dioxide Flexible Laser for Tumors of
the Upper Aerodigestive Tract,” The Laryngoscope, vol. 118 (12), pp.
2187–2189, Dec. 2008.
[9] da Vinci Surgical System. Intuitive Surgical Inc. CA, USA. [Online]
Available: www.intuitivesurgical.com. Accessed on 6-Sept-2013.
[10] J. F. Giallo, “A Medical Robotic System for Laser Phonomicrosurgery,”
Ph.D. dissertation, North Carolina State University, 2008.
[11] H. W. Tang, H. V . Brussel, J. V . Sloten, D. Reynaerts, G. D. Win, B. V .
Cleynenbreugel, and P. R. Koninckx, “Evaluation of an Intuitive Writing
Interface in Robot-aided Laser Laparoscopic Surgery,” Computer Aided
Surgery, vol. 11(1), pp. 21–30, 2006.
[12] L. Reinisch, M. Mendenhall, S. Charous, and R. H. Ossoff, “Computer-
assisted Surgical Techniques using the Vanderbilt Free Electron Laser,”
Laryngoscope, vol. 104(11 Pt 1), pp. 1323–1329, 1994.
[13] L. Mattos, M. Dellepiane, and D. Caldwell, “Next-Generation Micro-
manipulator for Computer-Assisted Laser Phonomicrosurgery,” in Proc.
33
rd
Ann. Intl. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology
Society, (EMBS 2011), 2011, pp. 4555–4559.
[14] N. Deshpande, L. S. Mattos, G. Barresi, A. Brogni, G. Dagnino,
L. Guastini, G. Peretti, and D. G. Caldwell, “Imaging based Metrics
for Performance Assessment in Laser Phonomicrosurgery,” in Proc. Intl.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation, (ICRA 2013), 2013, pp. 4850–4856.
4199
