A Soft, Amorphous Skin that can Sense and Localize Textures
Dana Hughes and Nikolaus Correll
Abstract— We present a soft, amorphous skin that can
sense and localize textures. The skin consists of a series
of sensing and computing elements that are networked
with their local neighbors and mimic the function of
the Pacinian corpuscle in human skin. Each sensor node
samples a vibration signal at 1KHz, transforms the signal
into the frequency domain, and classiﬁes up to 15 textures
using logistic regression. By measuring the power spectrum
of the signal and comparing it with its local neighbors,
computing elements can then collaboratively estimate the
location of the stimulus. The resulting low-bandwidth in-
formation, consisting of the texture probability distribution
and its location are then routed to a sink anywhere in
the skin in a multi-hop fashion. We describe the design,
manufacturing, classiﬁcation, localization and networking
algorithms and experimentally validate the proposed ap-
proach. In particular, we demonstrate texture classiﬁcation
with 71% accuracy and centimeter accuracy in localization
over an area of approximately three square feet using ten
networked sensor nodes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Developing a sense of touch in robotic devices has
been explored for several decades. Within the last
decade, tactile sensors have evolved from being located
solely on a ﬁngertip or hand to sensor arrays for full
body sensing [1]. Robotic arms equipped with full-body
tactile sensing become capable of navigating cluttered
environments and avoid damaging fragile objects [2].
This capability becomes even more important with direct
human-robot interaction, such as with nursing robotic
assistants or robotic companions [3]. Incorporating a
sense of touch can improve the robustness of grasping
tasks, such as when grasping with an end effector [4],
[5] or with full-body manipulation of large objects [6].
In addition, autonomous mobile robots can utilize full-
body tactile sensing in environments where vision may
be limited by occlusion of obstacles, such as when
navigating through bushes and trees or manipulating
foliage during a foraging task. Here, the ability to
not only sense touch, but also texture adds a whole
new dimension of environmental awareness both during
human-robot interaction and when navigating through or
manipulating the environment.
The move to full-body, multi-modal tactile sensing
presents several engineering challenges which are not
of concern with ﬁngertip and hand sensors [7], [8].
Sensor arrays and networks suffer scalability issues as
Both authors are with the Department of Computer Science, Univer-
sity of Colorado at Boulder, CO 80309. Email: ﬁrst.last@colorado.edu
Fig. 1: A soft, amorphous texture-sensitive skin mounted on
the back of a Baxter robot.
the number of sensors becomes large and their re-
quired bandwidth increases. Communication bandwidth
and centralized processing of measured values are both
bottlenecks in the system, limiting the number of sensors
(and consequently, the sensor density) and individual
sensor bandwidth. Sensor shape may be inﬂuenced by
the ability to tessellate individual sensors into a large ar-
ray. Adhering sensors to complex robotic structures may
result in gaps in the tessellation, severed communication
channels and areas where sensors must be modiﬁed or
omitted [9], however.
This paper presents a soft, autonomous sensing skin
for localizing and identifying textures rubbed against
the skin that can be manufactured in arbitrary shapes or
sizes, only limited by the size and spacing of individual
sensor nodes. We propose a design that considers the
skin as an amorphous material capable of processing
stimuli within the material itself, rather than a matrix
of densely packed individual sensors acting as texels
and communicating measurements directly to a central
processor. Collocating microcontrollers with sensors al-
lows for local and distributed processing of sensor mea-
surements. The skin only needs to communicate with
external devices when an event of interest occurs (e.g.,
the skin rubs against an obstacle), reducing communi-
cation and processing bandwidth. This is particularly
important when moving from binary tactile sensors to
high-bandwidth sensors such as textures, which require
information at bandwidths in the order of hundreds of
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1844
Hertz.
II. BACKGROUND
Human skin is sensitive to several different tactile
stimuli, such as tension, vibration and pressure. Each
sensation is detected through four different mechanore-
ceptors embedded in the human skin: the Pacinian
corpuscles, Meissner’s corpuscles, Merkel’s discs, and
Rufﬁni corpuscles [10]–[12]. The Pacinian corpuscles
are of particular interest to this investigation, as they
are responsible for detecting rapid vibrations generated
by sweeping the skin over a texture. The corpuscles
themselves have a resonant frequency of 250Hz, and
motivate the use of a high-bandwidth vibration sensor
for recording texture information. Tactile sensing in
human skin is more complex than this, the analogy
simply provides a motivation for this project.
Early work into texture detection includes the devel-
opment of a ﬁngertip for identifying texture [13]. This
ﬁngertip combined slip detection, temperature, pressure
sensors and vision to train a neural network to distin-
guish between 20 different textures with 100% accuracy.
More recently, a robotic ﬁngertip was developed which
was capable of identifying textures from a database of
117 textures with an accuracy of 95.4% using a Bayesian
classiﬁer [14]. The focus of this paper is not to replicate
these results, but to investigate an amorphous architec-
ture and distributed algorithms that can integrate such
high-bandwidth, multi-modal sensors into a stretchable
skin in a scalable and robust fashion.
As comprehensively surveyed in [1], the last decade
has seen tactile sensing evolve from sensors for ﬁn-
gertips and hands to sensor arrays suitable for full-
body tactile sensing, particularly for force and pressure
sensing [15]–[18]. These full-body arrays have focused
primarily on the development of the sensors themselves
and transduction of the signal. There is still much need
for suitable conditioning and processing of the signal
within the sensor network, prior to passing the signal to
a central processor [1].
A central issue with full-body tactile sensing is trans-
mitting the signals from the sensors to a communication
sink for further processing. Arranging the sensors in
a matrix is one solution, and is the approach used by
[17] and [18], among others, for a capacitive pressure
sensing skin. An alternative is to organize the sensors in
a hierarchical bus. Using this approach, [19] constructed
“cut-and-paste” tactile sensing sheets whose 1,024 sen-
sors in groups of 32 can be connected to an SMBus.
Also, [20] demonstrated a system with 192 capacitive
pressure that feed into a hierarchical bus with increasing
bandwidth (I
2
C to CAN) and allowed recording binary
touch events at 50 Hz. This system has evolved to
the ROBOSKIN project [16]. As the design maxed out
the bandwidth of the CAN bus, any additional sensor
sharing this communication channel would drastically
reduce the sensor bandwidth.
III. APPROACH
This paper investigates the utility of collocating com-
putation with individual sensors, and connecting these
in a large sensor network embedded in a robotic skin.
The sensors may be sparsely distributed in the skin,
and may leverage known properties of the material the
skin is made of to determine the location of stimuli.
The skin itself may be programmed to process the
signal and determine when a signal should be reported
to an external device for further processing. Individual
sensor nodes or local neighborhoods of sensors may also
perform in-network processing of the signal, possibly
reducing several data points to a single, predeﬁned event.
Combining distributed sensing and computation with
known material properties shifts this approach of skin
design from one of a sensor array to an amorphous
material.
For this investigation, we constructed a prototype skin
combining texture sensing and localized computation.
The purpose of this prototype is to explore texture detec-
tion and identiﬁcation, networking issues and stimulus
localization. The skin prototype consists of a network of
ten sensor nodes embedded in silicone rubber (Figure
1). The task of texture recognition demonstrates the
ability of this type of skin to solve the computation
and communication bottlenecks associated with sensor
arrays, while stimulus localization demonstrates how
material selection and skin design can be leveraged.
A. Sensor Node Network
A single sensor node is shown in Figure 2, left. Each
sensor node is composed of an Atmel ATxmega128A3U
microcontroller attached to a single WM-64K micro-
phone. The microphone is attached to the microcon-
troller’s 12-bit analog-digital converter (ADC) through
an operational ampliﬁer (LM358). Each microcontroller
can communicate with the node network using six hard-
ware serial ports (USARTs) at 115kbps. Using these six
independent communication channels allows arranging
the sensor nodes in a hexagonal lattice packing. Commu-
nication channels consist of a four-wire bus consisting
of power, ground, transmit and receive lines. A seventh
serial port is optionally available on each node, and
is only used for interfacing to a computer for initial
programming and retrieving data. Nodes can propagate a
program in a viral fashion throughout the network. The
absence of any central component allows for including
or removing nodes at any time.
1845
Fig. 2: Left: Close-up on an individual sensor node. Middle: sensor network woven into a neoprene lattice. Sensor node network
embedded into EcoFlex
TM
rubber. Right: Finished skin with 60-grit surface texture.
B. Design and Manufacturing
Individual sensor nodes are ﬁrst placed on a ﬂexible
neoprene rubber mesh (McMaster) and then embedded
into silicone rubber (Ecoﬂex Supersoft 0030). The com-
munication bus wires are woven in the rubber mesh.
The wires are woven in a spiraling pattern, providing
strain relief for the wires and ensuring the resulting
skin remains stretchable. When connected to the sensor
nodes, the wires securely attaches the sensor nodes to the
mesh. Connecting the nodes and communication wires to
a rubber mesh before embedding in silicone is necessary,
as these components would otherwise eventually tear out
of the silicone during use of the skin. Figure 2, middle,
shows the sensor network and mesh before embedding
in silicone rubber. The sensor nodes are spaced 15 cm
apart. Based on the resonant frequency of the Pacinian
corpuscle, 250Hz is considered the mid-frequency of
interest to be measured by the microphones. In the
silicone rubber, 15 cm corresponds to a distance half
of a wavelength of sound at 250 Hz. The overall size of
the mesh is approximately 61 cm x 43 cm.
Ecoﬂex is a two-part liquid rubber which cures solid.
The sensor network and mesh are placed in a form,
the bottom of which is covered with 60-grit aluminum
oxide sandpaper to create a surface texture similar to
a ﬁngertip. Figure 2, right, shows the surface of the
prototype skin after the sensor network is embedded in
silicone. The resulting skin is approximately 1 cm in
thickness.
C. Sound Detection
When the skin is rubbed, vibrations will be generated
on the surface. These vibrations will propagate through
the skin as described later in Section V-A. The vibration
propagates to a sensor node, where it is detected by the
microphone. The microcontroller continuously samples
the ampliﬁed signal at a sample rate of 1 kHz. Samples
are stored in a circular buffer of 256 samples. Once
the buffer is ﬁlled (i.e., roughly every 256 ms), the
microcontroller computes the spectrum of the signal
using the Fast Fourier Transform, resulting in a 128-
sample time slice. Samples continue to be written into
the buffer after this operation is performed, allowing
the signal from the microphone to be sampled as a
continuous stream.
The signal may contain various levels of noise, due
to ambient sound, electrical and ampliﬁcation noise,
etc. Since the skin ideally focuses on vibrations due to
a texture rubbed on the surface, ambient noises such
as these should be reduced if possible. Each sensor
maintains a buffer representing the best estimate of the
ambient signal, calculated as a smoothed power estimate
as in [21]. After every FFT calculation, the ambient
signal may be updated by slow averaging the incoming
time slice using the following equation
A(f;t) =S(f;t)+(1 )A(f;t 1) (1)
where A(f;t) is the estimated ambient noise at time
slicet,S(f;t) is the spectrum of the measured signal at
time t, and  is a factor representing the rate at which
the ambient signal is updated. High values of  imply
that the ambient estimation is sensitive to recent events,
while lower values result in an ambient estimation which
responds slower to changes in background noise. When
the background noise is steady, there should be little
change in A(f;t) over time. For this investigation, a
value of’ 0:05 was used as a smoothing constants, as
suggested in [21].
When an object rubs against the skin, the generated
vibrations result in a signal which contains extra energy
in the signal’s spectrum. At each time slice, the transient
spectrum,T(f;t) is calculated as the difference between
the spectrum of the measured signal and the ambient
noise, or
T(f;t) =min(S(f;t) A(f;t);0) (2)
The presence of a transient signal indicates that the
skin has been rubbed. To avoid falsely indicating a
stimulus on the skin, a sensor node will ignore a
transient signal unless it exceeds a certain threshold.
For this investigation, only transient signals whose total
energy exceeds three times the energy of the ambient
1846
signal indicates a stimulus. The threshold was manually
adjusted until the desired sensitivity was obtained.
Once a transient signal is detected, the total energy
of the signal is computed as the sum of spectral compo-
nents. The sensor node shares this energy with the sensor
nodes in its immediate neighborhood to determine the
location of the rubbed stimulus.
IV. TEXTURE IDENTIFICATION
Texture sensitive ﬁngertips utilized artiﬁcial neural
networks [13] and Bayesian classiﬁers [14]. As these
models are very memory intensive, we implemented a
logistic regression model to classify a detected stimulus
as one of 15 predeﬁned textures. Here, the likelihood
that the spectrum of a signal,X, is produced by a given
texture t is given by
y
t
(X) =g(w
0
+w
1
X
1
+X
2
f
2
:::+w
n
X
n
) (3)
whereX
1
toX
n
is the measured spectrum of the signal
(in our application, the 128-bin Fourier spectrum), w
0
to w
n
is a set of trained weights for the particular
texture, g() is the sigmoid function, and y
t
() is a
value in the range (0;1) representing the likelihood that
the texture t generated the measured signal. A logistic
regression model was selected over a neural network
in order to ensure that the model could be stored on
each microcontroller in the skin. Forn = 128 frequency
components and 15 different textures, we need to store
1920 weights in the microcontroller, which requires a
little less than 4kB of ﬂash memory. With 128kByte of
ﬂash available on the Xmega platform, this approach can
therefore scale to larger number of textures and more
potent classiﬁers.
V. LOCALIZATION APPROACH
Localization of a stimulus can either be performed
by determining which sensor detected the most intense
signal, as is the case in a densely packed sensor array, as
in [17] and [20] or by utilizing the signals detected from
a collection of sparsely located nodes and knowledge of
how a signal propagates through the skin’s material. This
latter approach is similar to sound source localization
in [22], albeit sound propagation in this investigation
involves a different propagation medium and structure.
A. Sound Propagation
For simplicity, the skin may be modeled as a thin
vibrating plane. As the skin is expected to be very
large in terms of signal wavelength, we assume it to be
inﬁnite in extent. This simpliﬁes the analysis of sound
propagation, as only a traveling wave radiating from
a stimulus. A more complete analysis would consider
reﬂections from the edge of the skin, connections, etc.,
and would consider various modes of vibration. As we
will see, an inﬁnite vibrating plane is sufﬁcient for our
purposes.
The displacement of an inﬁnite plate due to the
excitation from a point source is approximated by the
equation
w(r)'
iF
8!
s
2

s
hDk
f
r
e
i(k
f
r =4)
(4)
where F is the displacement force of the point source,
! is the frequency of the vibration, 
s
, h and D is the
density, thickness and rigidity of the plate, k
f
is the
wavenumber (!=c), andr is the distance from the point
source [23]. The sound intensity, I(r), is proportional
to the square of the displacement:
I(r) =
1
2

s
cjw(r)j
2
(5)
where c is the sound velocity in the skin. Combining
these two equations yields the sound intensity due to a
point excitation
I(r)'
F
2
64!hDk
2
f
r
(6)
Details of this derivation is available in [23].
Equation 6 describes the intensity of a vibration
measured by a microphone a distancer from the source
of the vibration. The material properties of the skin
(density, thickness and rigidity) are constant throughout
the skin. Isolating the terms associated with the material
and the stimulus results in
I(r) =
I
0
(F;!)
r
(7)
where I
0
(F;!) is related to the intensity of the
vibration signal at the source of the vibration, and is
given by
I
0
(F;!) =
F
2
64!hDk
2
f
(8)
For a given stimulus, the displacement force F will
be some arbitrary value which cannot be determined
directly from a microphone sensor. Performing calcu-
lations using a single frequency (as may be done for
localization), the source intensity I
0
may be considered
a constant in equation 7. The spectrum of the source
intensity will vary based on the mechanical properties
of the material rubbing against the skin [24], which is
used for material classiﬁcation.
To validate this derivation, we pressed a small vibra-
tion motor (1 cm x 2 mm) at speciﬁc distances from a
microphone sensor against the skin. The motor vibrated
with a force equivalent to 1G, at a frequency of 150
Hz. The size of the motor is assumed to be much
smaller than an area stimulated by rubbing, ensuring
1847
that the results from the motor experiment relate well
to localizing texture signal sources in practice.
Figure 3 shows the intensity of the measured sig-
nal with respect to the distance between the vibration
motor and microphone. At each point, 15 measurements
were made. The smooth curve is a least-square ﬁt to
the expression I
0
=r, where I
0
represents the unknown
source intensity in equation 7, and is the term varied
to ﬁt the measurement points. This ﬁgure demonstrates
that equation 7 is an accurate representation of the
propagation of sound in the skin.
Fig. 3: Amplitude of transient signal vs. Distance
B. Source Location Estimation
A sound of sufﬁcient intensity will be detected by
various sensors throughout the skin. Estimating the
location of the stimulus is easily expressed as an error
minimization problem. The approach to estimating the
location given here is based on measurements from three
sensors, but may be extended to more sensors. The local-
ization approach uses the ratio of two measured signal
intensities. Uniquely deﬁning a point on the surface of
the skin requires at least two independent signal ratios.
Consequently, three sensors can be considered the fewest
number of sensors needed to locate the source of a
vibration on the skin.
Figure 4 shows a signal generated at point (x,y), with
an source intensity I
0
(F;!), as described by equation
8. Using one frequency bin of the FFT of the mea-
sured signal, this value becomes a constant for a given
stimulus, as described in section V-A. The localization
experiment here used the frequency bin of the FFT of
the measured signal centered at 152 Hz (the closest
frequency of the vibration motor stimulus). Performing
localization measurements using several frequency bins
will provide additional estimates of the source of the
vibration.
Fig. 4: Propagation of sound to various sensors from an
arbitrary point on the skin.
As the signal propagates through the skin, it’s inten-
sity decreases inversely as a function of the distance
from the source, as given by equation 7. The sensors at
positionsA,B andC measure signal with intensityI
A
,
I
B
and I
C
, respectively. These three signals are related
to the stimulus by
I
i
=
I
0
r
i
(9)
where I
0
is the source intensity, I
i
is the intensity of
the signal measured at sensor i, and r
i
is the distance
from the sensor and the stimulus. The goal is to deter-
mine the source location (x,y) which produces the least
mean square error between the measured and expected
signals, or by satisfying the equation
min
(x;y)
X
i2fA;B;Cg

I
0
r
i
 I
i

2
: (10)
The displacement force F of the source of the vi-
bration is not known. Threfore, the value of I
0
cannot
be determined and must be removed from this equation.
This can be done by combining the measurements at two
nodes, whose intensity is expressed as
I
2
1
=
I
2
0
(x x1)
2
+(y y1)
2
(11)
I
2
2
=
I
2
0
(x x2)
2
+(y y2)
2
(12)
where nodes 1 and 2 are located at positions (x
1
,y
1
)
and (x
2
,y
2
), respectively, and have a measured intensity
of I
1
and I
2
. These two equations can be rewritten as
I
2
1
((x x
1
)
2
+(y y
1
)
2
) =I
2
0
(13)
I
2
2
((x x
2
)
2
+(y y
2
)
2
) =I
2
0
(14)
The difference between these two equations results in
the following single equation,
1848
TABLE I: Textures used for training and validating the classi-
ﬁer.
a) Brillo Pad b) Brush c) Cardboard
d) Coarse Wire Mesh e) Cotton f) Dense Foam
g) Fine Wire Mesh h) Plastic i) Sandpaper
j) Silicone Foam k) Skin l) Sponge
m) Terry Cloth n) Textured Silicone o) Wood
I
2
1
((x x
1
)
2
+(y y
1
)
2
) I
2
2
((x x
2
)
2
+(y y
2
)
2
) = 0
(15)
Given measurements from N nodes, it is possible to
derive N 1 independent equations of the above form.
Minimizing the error in these equations with respect
to (x, y) can be performed using gradient decent. The
mean of the locations of each node involved in the
measurement is used as an initial guess. The equations
are convex, so gradient decent is guaranteed to converge
on a global minimum.
VI. NETWORKING
All sensor nodes are networked to their local 6-
neighborhood using dedicated serial ports operating at
115kbps. For the purpose of this work, information is
propagated using a simple ﬂooding algorithm. That is,
whenever a sensor node detects a texture, results from
classiﬁcation are ﬂooded through the network and can be
collected anywhere. In order to limit communication to
the immediate neighborhood during texture localization,
we have implemented a Bloom-ﬁlter based multicast
routing algorithm [25], [26].
VII. RESULTS
A. Texture recognition
We performed a texture recognition experiment using
15 textures, which are summarized in Table I/Figure 5.
We have cut each sample into a small patch of roughly
one square inch size. For each texture, 100 samples
were taken by rubbing the texture on the surface of the
skin near a sensor, and recording the transient signal
measured by the node. Each sample consisting of 128
spectral components. A logistic regression model was
trained on this data set using Weka, a machine learning
library [27], and accuracy was assessed using 10-fold
cross-validation. The logistic regression model was able
to classify textures with an accuracy of 71.7%, which
compares favorably to the expected accuracy of 6.7%
from random guessing. To compare, a two-layer neural
network was also trained using Weka. Classiﬁcation was
only slightly better with 73.1% accuracy.
Fig. 5: Textures used for training and validating the classiﬁer.
Fig. 6: Region and sensor nodes used in localization experi-
ment.
B. Localization
Initial localization experiments involved a 15 cm x 13
cm region of the skin shown in Figure 6, measuring
the signal at three sensor nodes (A, B and C). The
intensity of the vibration motor placed on a grid with
1 cm intervals were measured by each of these sensors.
Figure 7 show the measured intensity of the transient
signal measured by three sensor nodes located in the
region. In all of these plots, the darker areas indicate
higher transient signal intensity.
From these measurements, the location of the stimulus
at each point was calculated as described in Section V-
B. The error between the calculated and actual locations
for each point is shown as a vector in Figure 8. The
dashed lines deﬁne a triangle whose vertices are the
three sensors which detected the signal. Outside this
region, a different set of sensors would be used to
determine the location of the source and produce a more
accurate result. Within the region of interest, the mean
and standard deviation of the overall error was calculated
as 
r
= 3.55 cm and 
r
= 1.96 cm, respectively.
C. Networking
To compare the reliability and robustness of the pro-
posed network topology to that of a bus-like architecture,
we conducted two sets of experiments. First, we sent
64 byte packets from node 2 to node 3 in Figure 9
(three hops) using a simple ﬂooding algorithm with all
adjacent nodes enabled. Figure 10 shows the percentage
of received packets as a function of packet loss at each
intermediate node for transport through the amorphous
1849
Fig. 7: Amplitude of transient signal from sensors A (left), B (middle) and C (right).
Fig. 8: Error in calculated location of signal source.
network (solid line) as a function of individual node
failure rate (e.g., dropped packet, failed bus connection,
etc.). In a second experiment, we removed all nodes
labeled X from the network and sent packets from the
node 1 to node 4 (6 hops) and measured throughput at
each node for different packet loss (dashed lines). Re-
sults show that the amorphous network provides higher
throughput than communication over one hop with nodes
deliberately dropping 30% of the packets, and over two
hops with nodes dropping 55% of the packets.
Fig. 9: Source and sink nodes used in networking experiment
VIII. DISCUSSION
We demonstrated the development and implementa-
tion of a soft, amorphous sensing skin that performs
texture recognition, localization and event-driven data
transport. Focusing on systems-level challenges in this
Fig. 10: Packet loss in a network with unreliable nodes for
different networking architectures
paper, we limited this investigation to only one type of
sensor (texture), localization of general sound sources,
and data dissemination using a simple ﬂooding protocol.
With texture having the highest bandwidth requirements
among possible sensors (binary touch, pressure, tem-
perature, capacitance, conductance, etc.) and the highest
processing requirements (calculating a FFT vs. simply
recording data or measuring changes), we believe that
the proposed system can easily be extended to other
sensor types and in-network processing algorithms, such
as detecting patterns or shapes in a pressure proﬁle.
Similarly, texture recognition classiﬁcation accuracy
of 70% using simple regression and a single sen-
sor modality could be improved by adding additional
sensors such as temperature, capacitance or pressure,
or improving the classiﬁer, as demonstrated in related
work focusing on single sensor architectures [14]. The
amorphous computing approach presented here offers
additional unprecedented ways of improvement. For
example, implementing consensus classiﬁers [28] that
compare texture signatures with those recorded by their
neighbors, or optimizing material properties and topol-
ogy of the sensor network are obvious next steps.
For example, sound conductivity might be greatly im-
proved by embedding metallic meshes, while further
1850
miniaturization of electronics could allow for a higher
sensor density. Finally, techniques from data aggregation
and routing in sensor networks could be leveraged to
maximize throughput in the amorphous network.
IX. CONCLUSION
We presented a soft, amorphous sensing skin that
can collaboratively process high-bandwidth sensor in-
formation within the material and thereby drastically
reduce the bandwidth requirements of a communication
subsystem and a central computer that will eventually
process this information. Although focusing only on
textures, the bandwidth requirements of this sensor
are three orders of magnitude larger than pressure or
temperature, suggesting the suitability of the approach
for multi-modal sensing and in-network processing, such
as recognition of shapes, which we will investigate in
future work. We will also focus on further miniaturizing
the existing sensor node in order to wrap the sensing
skin around complex, moving robot parts such as hands,
wrists and arms.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by NSF awards #1153158,
#1150223, #1225934 , the Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc
research under grant #FA9550-12-1-0145 and a NASA
Early Career Faculty fellowship NNX12AQ47GS02.
REFERENCES
[1] R. S. Dahiya, G. Metta, M. Valle and G. Sandini, “Tactile
Sensing–from Humans to Humanoids,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 1-20, February 2010.
[2] A. Jain, M. D. Killpack, A. Edsinger and C. C. Kemp, “Manipu-
lation in Clutter with Whole-Arm Tactile Sensing,” Int. Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 458-482, April 2013.
[3] V . Duchaine, N. Lauzier, M. Baril, M.-A. Lacasse and C. Gos-
selin, “A Flexible Robot Skin for Safe Physical Human Robot
Interaction”, in Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion, pp. 3676-3681, 2009.
[4] K. Hsiao, L. P. Kaelbling, and T. Lozano-Perez, “Task-driven
Tactile Exploration,” In Proc. of Robotics: Science and Systems,
2010.
[5] J. Romano, K. Hsiao, G. Niemeyer, S. Chitta and K. Kuchen-
becker, “Human-Inspired Robotic Grasp Control with Tactile
Sensing”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 27, no. 6, pp.
1067-1079, December 2011.
[6] P. Mittendorfer, E. Yoshida, T. Moulard and G. Cheng, “A
General Tactile Approach for Grasping Unknown Objects with a
Humanoid Robot”, to appear in Proc. of the IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2013.
[7] R. S. Dahiya, P. Mittendorfer, M. Valle, G. Cheng and
V . J. Lumelsky, “Directions Toward Effective Utilization of
Tactile Skin: A Review”, IEEE Sensors Journal, vol. 13, no.
11, pp. 4121-4138, November 2013.
[8] R. S. Dahiya and M. Valle, Robotic Tactile Sensing, Springer
2013.
[9] D. Anghinolﬁ, G. Cannata, F. Mastrogiovanni, C. Nattero and
M. Paolucci, “On the Problem of the Automated Design of
Large-Scale Robot Skin”, IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, vol. PP, issue 99, pp. 1-14, April 2013.
[10] R. Johannson and A. Vallbo, “Tactile Sensibility in the Hu-
man Hand: Relative and Absolute Densities of Four Types of
Mechanoreceptive Units in Glabrous Skin”, Journal of Physiol-
ogy, vol. 286, pp. 283-300, 1979.
[11] A. Vallbo and R. Johannson, “Properties of Cutnaeous
Mechanoreceptors in the Human Hand Related to Touch Sen-
sation”, Human Neurobiology, vol. 3, pp. 3-14, 1984.
[12] J. Scheiber, S. Leurent, A. Prevost and G. Debr´ egeas, “The Role
of Fingerprints in the Coding of Tactile Information Probed with
a Biomimetic Sensor”, Science, vol. 323, no. 5920, pp. 1503-
1506, March 2009.
[13] D. Taddeucci, C. Laschi, R. Lazzarini, R. Magni, P. Dario and
A. Starita, “An Approach to Integrated Tactile Perception”, in
Proc. of the Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 3100-
3105, 1997.
[14] J. A. Fishel and G. E. Loeb, “Bayesian Exploration for Intelligent
Identiﬁcation of Textures”, Frontiers in Neurorobotics, vol. 6,
2012.
[15] T. Hoshi and H. Shinoda, “A Large Area Robot Skin Based on
Cell-Bridge System”, in Proc. of the 5th IEEE Conf. on Sensors,
pp. 827-830, 2006.
[16] A. Billard, A. Bonﬁglio, G. Cannata, P. Cosseddu, T. Dahl,
K. Dautenhahn, F. Mastrogiovanni, G. Metta, L. Natale,
B. Robins, L. Seminara and M. Valle, “The ROBOSKIN Project:
Challenges and Results”, in Romansy 19–Robot Design, Dynam-
ics and Control, pp 351-358, Springer, Vienna, 2013.
[17] S. Mannsfeld, B. Tee, R. Stoltenberg, C. Chen, S. Barman,
B. Muir, A. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. Bao, “Highly Sensitive
Flexible Pressure Sensors with Microstructured Rubber Dielec-
tric Layers”, Nature Materials, vol. 9, pp. 859-864, 2010.
[18] J. Ulmen and M. Cutkosky, “A Robust, Low-Cost and Low-Noise
Artiﬁcial Skin for Human-Friendly Robots”, in Proc. of the Int.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 4836-4841, 2010.
[19] Y . Ohmura, Y . Kuniyoshi and A. Nagakubo, “Conformable and
Scalable Tactile Sensor Skin for Curved Surfaces”, inProc.ofthe
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1348-1353, Orlando,
FL, May 2006.
[20] G. Cannata, M. Maggiali, G. Metta and G. Sandini, “An Embed-
ded Artiﬁcial Skin for Humanoid Robots”, in IEEE Int. Conf. on
Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent Systems, pp.
434-438, August 2008.
[21] R. Martin, “An Efﬁcient Algorithm to Estimate the Instantaneous
SNR of Speech Signals”, Proc. of the 2nd European Conference
on Speech, Communication and Technology (EUROSPEECH
’93), pp. 1093-1096, Berlin, Germany, September 1993.
[22] J.-M. Valin, F. Michaud, J. Rouat and D. L´ etourneau, “Robust
Sound Source Localization Using a Microphone Array on a
Mobile Robot”, Proc. of the 2003 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 2, pp. 1228-1233, October
2003.
[23] M. C. Junger and D. Feit, Sound, Structures, and Their Interac-
tion, MIT Press, 1972.
[24] S. Decherchi, P. Gastaldo, R. S. Dahiya, M. Valle and R. Zunino,
“Tactile Data Classiﬁcation of Contact Materials Using Compu-
tational Intelligence”, IEEE Transaction on Robotics, vol. 27, no.
3, pp. 635-639, June 2011.
[25] H. Hosseinmardi, R. Han, N. Correll, “Bloom Filter-Based Ad
Hoc Multicast Communication in Cyber-Physical Systems and
Computational Materials”, in the 7th Int. Conf. on Wireless
Algorithms, Systems, and Applications (WASA 2012), Lecture
Notes in Computer Science V olume, 7405, 2012.
[26] S. Ma, H. Hosseinmardi, N. Farrow, R. Han and N. Correll.
“Establishing Multi-Cast Groups in Computational Robotic Ma-
terials”, in IEEE Int. Conf. on Cyber, Physical and Social
Computing, Besancon, France, November 2012.
[27] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann and
I.H. Witten, “The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update”,
SIGKDD Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, 2009.
[28] J. A. Benediktsson and P. H. Swain, “Consensus Theoretic
Classiﬁcation Methods”, IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 688-704, July 1992.
1851
