Regrasping Objects Using Extrinsic Dexterity
Nikhil Chavan Daﬂe
1
, Alberto Rodriguez
1
, Robert Paolini
2
, Bowei Tang
2
, Siddhartha S. Srinivasa
2
Michael Erdmann
2
, Matthew T. Mason
2
, Ivan Lundberg
3
, Harald Staab
3
and Thomas Fuhlbrigge
3
1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
2
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University,
3
ABB Corporate Research Center
(nikhilcd, albertor)@mit.edu, (rpaolini, boweit)@cmu.edu, (siddh, me, matt.mason)@cs.cmu.edu,
ivan.lundberg@se.abb.com, (harald.staab,thomas.a.fuhlbrigge)@us.abb.com
I. INTRODUCTION
This video presents the application of Extrinsic Dexterity
to change the pose of an object in the hand, i.e., to regrasp
the object.
Gravity, inertia, arm motions and external contacts can all
be exploited to manipulate an object in the hand. As such
dexterity does not depend solely on the intrinsic capability
of the hand, but rather is derived from external resources,
we call it as “Extrinsic Dexterity”.
The video showcases a repertoire of regrasps developed
for a simple gripper and presents one of the sequences of
regrasps designed to explore border manipulation capability
by connecting different regrasps.
II. RELATED WORK
Robotics researchers have studied regrasp for a long time.
Place and pick as seen in [1] was one of the earliest
approaches used to regrasp an object and is still being used
in industry. Dexterous manipulation is another approach,
originally formulated by Salisbury [2], which relies on ﬁnely
controlled motions of ﬁngers to manipulate the object.
Contrary to these two approaches which rely only on
intrinsic capability of a gripper, extrinsic dexterity exploits all
possible resources for manipulation. A more general use of
external resources such as gravity, constraints from external
contacts and dynamic motions of a manipulator for object
manipulation was noted by Lynch and Mason in [3]. Brock’s
work on controlled slip [4], Erdmann’s research on two
palm manipulation [5] and Lynch and Mason’s work on
dynamic manipulation [6] are few of the examples that ﬁt
this approach which we refer as extrinsic dexterity.
III. REGRASP ACTIONS
We developed twelve regrasp actions for three different
objects. One of the regrasps, squeezing, is an intrinsic
regrasp, as it does not depend on any external resources.
It squeezes an object in an enveloping grasp to move it to a
more stable pose. All other regrasp actions harness external
resources and are divided into three categories.
A. Quasistatic regrasps using external contacts
Regrasps grouped in this category take advantage of the
constraints from external contacts to reorient the objects
in the hand. Manipulator motions are planned such that
a wrench required at every instant to move an object is
generated as a result of arm motions and external constraints.
B. Passive dynamic regrasps
The outcome of these regrasps is entirely governed by the
dynamics of the object rolling on the phalanges under the
inﬂuence of gravity. The initial pose of an object determines
the effective reorientation of the object after it is released.
C. Active dynamic regrasps
These are more challenging regrasps in which the opening
and closing of the hand need to be coordinated with the
dynamic motions of the manipulator.
All these regrasp actions are hand-scripted and are tuned
manually for particular objects. The robustness of the regrasp
actions is evaluated from over 1200 experiments; 50 trials of
each regrasp, 600 trials of one of the regrasps by changing
the initial pose of the object and 90 trials of sequences of
regrasps.
IV. GRASP GRAPH AND SEQUENCES
We introduce a grasp graph as a directed graph having
grasp types as nodes and regrasp actions as edges. A strongly
connected grasp graphs allow us to plan sequences of re-
grasps to transfer the objects from any grasp pose to any
another. Using grasp graphs we developed three sequences
of regrasps, one of which appears in this video.
V. DISCUSSION
The video demonstrates that dexterity is not a property of a
robotic hand alone, but that of the entire system. Dexterous
manipulation is possible with a hand dramatically simpler
than typical dexterous hands; the key is to use the motions
of the arm, object inertia, gravity, and external contacts:
extrinsic dexterity.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Paul, K. Pingle, J. Feldman, and A. Kay, “Instant insanity,” ﬁlm,
1971.
[2] J. K. Salisbury Jr., “Kinematic and Force Analysis of Articulated
Hands,” PhD Dissertation, Stanford University, 1982.
[3] K. M. Lynch and M. T. Mason, “Stable pushing: Mechanics, control-
lability, and planning,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 533–556,
1996.
[4] D. Brock, “Enhancing the dexterity of a robot hand using controlled
slip,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 1, 1988, pp.
249–251.
[5] M. A. Erdmann, “An exploration of nonprehensile two-palm manipu-
lation,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 485–503, 1998.
[6] K. M. Lynch and M. T. Mason, “Dynamic nonprehensile manipulation:
Controllability, planning and experiments,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 64–92, 1999.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2560
