  
  
Abstract— This paper presents a hand-held microsurgical 
forceps design with force-feedback capabilities designed for 
micromanipulation tasks. The device uses a customized force 
sensor that measures grasping forces over a range of 0-300mN 
and uses an actuator to exert amplified forces back on to the 
operator’s fingertip in a mechanically-ungrounded setup. This 
allows perception of low force levels that are otherwise 
imperceptible to human touch. A customized force sensor 
design for the forceps grasping measurement is presented and a 
calibration experiment was conducted to validate its linearity 
and repeatability. A bench test of the device was conducted to 
demonstrate its intrinsic force-amplifying capabilities, with 
amplification factors of up to ?50 reported. A user study was 
conducted to confirm that the device could significantly 
improve human perception of grasping forces compared to 
conventional microsurgical forceps with the results 
demonstrating an order-of-magnitude improvement in force 
perception. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
OBOTIC systems designed for surgery aim to exploit the 
superior control and enhanced sensing capabilities of a 
robot in combination with the clinical experience and 
decision-making capabilities of the operating surgeon. This 
is commonly achieved through teleoperated master-slave 
systems or cooperatively-controlled robots, such as the 
Steady-Hand robot [1]. Cooperatively-controlled robots 
allow manipulation of the instrument by both the surgeon 
and the robot which provides steady, precise motion of the 
surgical tool and the ability to provide force-scaling for 
delicate surgical tasks. Mechanically-ungrounded, hand-held 
robotic surgical devices are an alternative approach to 
grounded systems, with the advantages of being more 
compact and physically unobtrusive to manipulate. 
Furthermore, hand-held robotic surgical devices can be 
integrated into the surgical workflow with greater ease. 
Micron is one such hand-held device that has been 
primarily designed to suppress physiological tremor of the 
operator [2]. This is useful in micromanipulation tasks that 
warrant particularly precise control of the interventional 
tools, such as in retinal surgery [3] and cell manipulation [4]. 
Hand-held devices with tool-tip motion-compensation can 
also incorporate virtual fixtures that prevent the instrument 
 
Manuscript received 15
th
 September, 2013. Christopher J. Payne, Hedyeh 
Rafii-Tari, Hani J. Marcus and Guang-Zhong Yang are with the Hamlyn 
Centre for Robotic Surgery, Imperial College London, UK. 
(email: christopher.payne@imperial.ac.uk) 
 
Research supported in part by a Wates Fellowship and the Wellcome Trust 
Medical Engineering Centre of Excellence Grant. 
 
tool-tip reaching anatomically-critical ‘no-go’ zones [5], [6]. 
More recently, these systems have incorporated force-
feedback to the operating surgeon [7]. Haptic feedback 
ensures that the forces exerted are appropriately delicate 
when handling tissue. In fields such as neurosurgery and 
ophthalmic surgery, tissue is highly fragile, with tool 
interaction forces often below 7.5mN; levels that are often 
imperceptible to most surgeons [8]. Moreover, in the case of 
neurosurgery, brain tissue is frequently eloquent and has 
little capacity for regeneration, so the consequences of 
iatrogenic injury when such force thresholds are exceeded 
are often severe and usually permanent.  The corollary is that 
devices that scale up tool-tissue interaction forces may 
reduce the risk of tissue injury, and improve patient safety 
[9]. Mechanically-ungrounded, hand-held devices that can 
perform force amplification in micromanipulation have been 
devised for this purpose. In a mechanically-ungrounded 
setup, the reaction forces generated by the device must be 
transmitted through the operator of the instrument. These 
devices utilize embedded actuators to exert forces on to the 
operator based on forces sensed at the tool tip. Stetten et al. 
described a force-magnifying device that provided feedback 
using a solenoid mounted on to the back of the operator’s 
hand [10], [11]. Furthermore, Payne et al. presented a device 
that provided force-feedback to the operator’s fingertip, 
forgoing a bracing or anchoring mechanism in [12].  
A key requirement of force-amplifying devices is in the 
sensing of low force ranges below those of human 
perception. One such technique is the use of optical fiber 
sensors to provide high sensitivity force sensing in surgical 
instruments. Fiber Bragg grating (FBG) sensors with sub 
milli-newton accuracy have been integrated into surgical 
tools for retinal microsurgery [13] and have been 
implemented on the Steady-Hand robot [14]. These sensing 
systems have also been applied to hand-held instruments, 
including Micron [15] and in customized forceps [16], [17]. 
Micro-electromechanical (MEMS-based) sensors have also 
been developed for force-feedback systems [18] and in 
micro-gripper designs [19]. Strain gauge-based sensing has 
also been adopted for micro-gripping applications [20], [21]. 
Researchers have also devised forceps that incorporate 
piezoelectric sensing and actuation [22]. 
Intelligent force sensing at the tip of a surgical instrument 
allows for meaningful force-feedback whereby only the 
important tool-tissue forces are rendered back to the 
surgeon. Examples of this include the bypassing of the 
frictional insertion forces in both endovascular 
catheterization [23] and epidural needle insertion [24]. In the 
case of microsurgical grasping tasks, force-feedback to the 
operator is hindered when using conventional spring-loaded 
Hand-Held Microsurgical Forceps with Force-Feedback for 
Micromanipulation 
Christopher J. Payne, Hedyeh Rafii-Tari, Hani J. Marcus and Guang-Zhong Yang Fellow, IEEE 
R
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 284
  
forceps as substantial force must be exerted simply to 
overcome the spring-return mechanism.  
 This paper presents hand-held microsurgical forceps that 
incorporate force-feedback to the operator based upon a 
direct measurement of the forceps grasping force. The 
system allows amplification of these forces to levels that are 
better perceived by the human operator in a mechanically-
ungrounded configuration. A customized force sensor 
mounted at the forceps tip is presented with a force-sensing 
capability in the 0-300mN range which allows force 
amplification factors of up to ?50. The sensor calibration is 
reported and the device is validated in bench tests with 
respect to its intrinsic force-feedback capabilities. 
Additionally, a user study was conducted in order to confirm 
that the force-feedback can help limit the amount of force 
exerted in delicate grasping tasks.  
II. DEVICE OVERVIEW AND DESIGN 
A. Device Overview 
The force-feedback forceps are designed according to 
standard microsurgical forceps whereby the operating 
surgeon must compress a spring return lever mechanism in 
order to close the forceps. A force sensor is integrated into 
one tip of the forceps in order to allow measurements of the 
forceps grasping force (F
g
). An actuator is then used to exert 
amplified forces on to the operator’s fingertip. The reaction 
forces generated by the actuator are transmitted through the 
operator’s grip of the force-feedback forceps. Crucially, the 
actuator is mounted perpendicular to the grasping direction 
of the forceps levers. This design feature ensures the 
operating surgeon can distinguish between the amplified-
force feedback from the forceps tip sensor and the forces 
required to compress the spring levers of the forceps by 
exploiting the ability of the human fingertip to resolve forces 
spatially. A second force sensor, mounted between the 
actuator and the operator’s fingertip allows measurements of 
the force exerted on the operator (F
f
) which permits closed-
loop force control to provide force amplification. The device 
is presented in Fig. 1.  
 
Fig. 1.  A photograph of the hand-held force-feedback forceps prototype. 
B. Grasping Force Sensor Design 
A critical aspect of force-feedback systems for microsurgical 
applications is the tool-tissue force-sensing. Commercially-
available, fully-integrated force-sensors are typically large 
and designed to measure forces at the newton-scale. With 
such sensors, force measurements at the milli-newton-scale 
require significant amplification and are therefore prone to 
noise interference. Another key consideration is the physical 
size of the sensors which must remain compact for practical 
clinical deployment. In consideration of these aspects, a 
silicon strain gauge-based force sensor (AE801, Kronex, 
Oakland, USA) was chosen to make measurements of the 
forceps grasping forces. The sensor is configured as a silicon 
cantilever beam which is sensitive to bending deflections. 
The sensor is compact (1.8mm diameter ? 10mm total 
length) and can measure a maximum force of 120mN, 
leading to good sensitivity and a high signal-to-noise ratio at 
sub-newton force levels. The silicon strain-gauge sensor 
exhibits good linearity (±0.25% FSO) and low hysteresis 
(±0.1% FSO). Another advantage of strain-gauge sensors is 
their low cost and that their operation does not necessitate 
additional hardware, such as the integrators required for 
FBG sensors. A disadvantage of the AE801 is its fragility; 
the sensor is only rated to accept a 120% overload and is 
also fragile to other out-of-plane and torsional loads, making 
it impractical for direct deployment in a surgical device.  
To address this issue, the AE801 is integrated into an 
assembly that utilizes an elastic beam in parallel to the 
sensor beam so as to support a proportion of the total 
grasping load. The sensor assembly is presented in Fig. 2.  
 
Fig. 2.  Close-up photographs and illustration of the grasping force sensor 
assembly. 
Since the AE801 is sensitive to displacements at the µm 
scale, the sensor is coupled to the forceps tip using a 
0.17mm nitinol wire which acts as a low stiffness spring so 
as to prevent significant undesirable pre-loading during 
assembly and avoids the necessity for high precision 
manufacturing which cannot be achieved using the rapid 
prototyping methods used to manufacture the sensor 
assembly. The sensor was designed empirically, with the 
aim of achieving a minimum sensing range of 0-300mN so 
as to be sensitive enough at low force levels whilst 
remaining robust to higher loading. This was done through a 
process of tuning the stiffness of the parallel cantilever and 
the stiffness of the coupling spring through geometrical 
alterations to the design. The AE801 was rigidly bonded to 
the forceps tip assembly using a cyanoacrylate adhesive to 
minimize hysteresis effects. 
285
  
C. Mechatronics Design and Control Scheme 
A base chassis and the sensor assembly previously described 
are mounted to standard, stainless steel microsurgical 
forceps (S&T D-5A, Dumont Surgical, Gaithersburg, USA) 
that are commonly used for grasping tasks in micro-
anastomosis. The forceps tips have a total grasping stroke of 
11mm. The force-feedback forceps are designed to operate 
as close to conventional forceps as possible with minimal 
interference from the additional components. The tight 
spatial constraints imposed by the short, angled tips of the 
forceps and the grasping location of the operator’s fingertip 
make it impractical to mount a force-feedback actuator 
ahead of the fingertip location. It is therefore mounted at the 
proximal region of the forceps, off the axis of the forceps 
levers so as to allow space for the operator’s finger. A voice-
coil actuator (VCA) (LVCM-013-013-02, Moticont) was 
used to provide the force-feedback. The forces generated by 
the VCA are then transmitted through a low friction slider 
mechanism which is constrained to pure axial motion 
through an anti-rotation keyway. The slider is coupled to a 
plate which makes contact with the operator’s fingertip 
through the feedback force sensor (8438 5005, Burster). The 
total weight of the device is 48g. These design features are 
illustrated in Fig. 3 
 
Fig. 3.  Shows the key features of the device (1) VCA, (2) coupling, (3) 
force transmission rod (4) mounting chassis, (5) microsurgical forceps, (6) 
anti-rotation mechanism, (7) force-feedback display incorporating the force-
feedback sensor and (8) the force-sensing forceps tip. 
The addition of the mounting chassis and VCA to the 
elastic forceps forms a cantilever mass-spring system. 
Therefore, the chassis is mounted on the opposite forceps 
lever to that of the lever containing the force sensor. This 
avoids control instability arising through excitation due to 
the mechanical coupling of the sensor and actuator. 
The control scheme for the force-feedback forceps is 
implemented on a multi-threaded, real-time controller 
(CompactRIO, cRIO-9022, National Instruments Corp.) that 
operates on a 1kHz loop.  Both the grasping force sensor and 
feedback force sensor input voltages are acquired by the 
controller following amplification through separate 
Wheatstone half-bridge arrangements before being 
converted to newtons by the controller. The forceps grasping 
force measurement F
g
 is then multiplied by the pre-set 
amplification factor before forming the set-point to a PID 
control loop. The fingertip force measurement F
f
 provides 
the feedback in order to facilitate closed-loop control. The 
output from the PID algorithm is converted to a voltage by 
the CompactRIO which is then received by a linear amplifier 
(LSC 30/2 linear 4Q Servoamplifier, Maxon) which supplies 
power to the VCA. 
III. EXPERIMENTS 
A.  Grasping Force Sensor Calibration 
A calibration experiment was conducted to evaluate the 
forceps tip sensor assembly prototype with respect to its 
linearity and repeatability. This is important in order to 
validate the force-amplifying capabilities of the overall 
system. The sensor assembly was loaded against a force-
torque (F/T) sensor (Nano17, ATI Industrial Automation, 
Inc., USA) whilst the force output from the F/T sensor and 
the voltage output from the forceps tip sensor were 
acquired. The Nano17 has a resolution of 3.125mN for the 
calibration adopted in this study which imposes a limit on 
the minimum force that can be quantified using this 
calibration method. Three loading and unloading cycles 
were conducted over a range of 300mN and are shown in 
Fig. 4. A line of best fit using the least squares method is 
fitted through this data. Table I provides a summary of the 
regression ratios and coefficients of determination for the 
individual loading and unloading curves. 
 
Fig. 4.  Calibration experiment showing the voltage output for a force input 
range of 0-300mN for three successive loading cycles, a linear regression 
for the entire data set is included on the plot. 
TABLE I 
TABLE SHOWING THE LINEAR REGRESSION MODELS FOR THE MEASURED 
GRASPING FORCE SENSOR ASSEMBLY CALIBRATION  
 
Regression Ratio 
(mN/V) 
Coefficient of 
Determination R
2
 
 
First Loading 
First Unloading 
Second Loading 
Second Unloading 
Third Loading 
Third Unloading 
 
Mean  
Standard Deviation 
 
50.94 
50.69 
50.77 
51.29 
50.54 
50.46 
 
50.78 
0.30 
 
0.999 
0.996 
0.999 
0.994 
0.999 
0.993 
 
0.997 
0.003 
 
The results presented in Fig. 4. and Table I indicate that the 
sensor assembly produces a repeatable and linear response 
over a range of 0-300mN. It can be observed that there is a 
slight hysteresis effect between loading and unloading cycles 
286
  
which is most likely due to the polymer-based material from 
which the force-sensor assembly is constructed from.  
 
B.  Force-Amplification Bench Tests 
The force-feedback forceps were evaluated in a bench test 
designed to evaluate the force-amplifying abilities of the 
system. Measurements of the forceps grasping force F
g
 and 
the fingertip force F
f
 were made as the device was loaded 
and unloaded for a series of amplification factors between 3-
50. The amplification factor is denoted as k and is defined as 
the ratio F
f
 /F
g
. The calibration described in the previous 
section was adopted for the F
g
 measurements. The force-
feedback sensor that makes measurements of F
f
 was 
calibrated against a precision weight. A spring was used to 
support the reaction forces generated by the VCA whilst the 
forceps tip sensor was loaded and unloaded. The results are 
presented in Fig. 5. 
 
Fig. 5.  Plot showing the force-amplifying abilities of the force-feedback 
forceps for 7 amplification factors through a range of 3-50. 
Fig. 5. confirms the force-amplifying abilities of the force-
feedback forceps. Lines of best fit have been added to the 
measured data for the range of amplification factors. These 
only consider the linear region in which force-amplification 
occurs, neglecting the discontinuities introduced by the VCA 
saturating at its peak power consumption. The force-
feedback forceps can retain controlled force amplification at 
all measured amplification factors. Whilst the VCA can 
generate forces greater than the 300mN range displayed in 
Fig. 5, this is the most significant region of interest as it 
represents the perceptible force levels displayed to the 
fingertip (in the order of ?10
2
 mN [12]) against the otherwise 
imperceptible force levels exerted by the grasping forceps (? 
?10
1
 mN [8]). 
 
C.  User Study 
A user study was conducted in order to evaluate the 
effectiveness of the force-feedback forceps in a grasping 
task with the hypothesis that force-feedback reduces the 
force threshold at which a user can detect grasping of an 
object. The experiment compares the force-feedback forceps 
prototype against standard microsurgical forceps (S&T D-
5A, Dumont Surgical, Gaithersburg, USA), the identical 
model to the forceps that were integrated into the force-
feedback prototype. These conventional forceps weigh 15g. 
Eight users (5 male and 3 female) with  an age range of 24 to 
33 years were recruited for this study. All users were right-
handed and none reported prior clinical experience. The 
experimental setup is shown in Fig. 6.  
 
 
Fig. 6.  The experimental setup shown from two angles with the force-
feedback forceps prototype (left) and conventional microsurgical forceps 
(right), the grasping plane is denoted by the white arrows. 
The forceps were arranged such that one lever of the 
forceps was grounded whilst the other lever was free to be 
grasped by the users. A wire and low stiffness spring were 
mounted to a ‘U’ profiled frame so as to be orientated 
longitudinal to the grasping plane of the forceps and 
positioned so that contact would be made upon grasping of 
the forceps by the users. The ‘U’ profiled frame was coupled 
to a grounded F/T sensor (Nano17, ATI Industrial 
Automation, Inc., USA) so that an independent measurement 
of the forceps grasping force could be made. This 
arrangement was adopted to ensure the measurement of a 
bilateral grasping force, otherwise users could potentially 
detect contact resulting from only a single lever of the 
forceps. Since it was expected that the force-feedback 
forceps would be capable of determining considerably lower 
force thresholds, a low stiffness spring fabricated from 
polyurethane was placed in series with the wire so that the 
forceps tip would always make initial contact with the low 
stiffness spring. A spring of low stiffness was used, firstly to 
be representative of the soft tissue encountered in 
microsurgery and secondly, in order to minimize errors as a 
result of the reaction time between the users making contact 
and perceiving contact with the spring.  Once the soft spring 
had been fully compressed the forceps would be resisted 
purely by the wire which was much stiffer, so as to exert up 
to around 2N at maximum compression of the forceps. This 
ensured that users would eventually perceive a force in 
addition to the spring return on the forceps. The tips of the 
forceps for both cases were mounted so as to contact at the 
same point along the wire to ensure that it would give the 
same stiffness response for both experimental set-ups. 
The ‘U’ profiled frame and F/T sensor were mounted on a 
translation stage that could translate in the direction of the 
forceps grasping plane. This allowed the position of the wire 
and low stiffness spring assembly (in the plane of the 
grasping direction) to be randomly altered to different 
positions over a range of 3mm offset from the tip of the 
forceps. This was done in an effort to reduce the user’s 
proprioception sense which could help them learn when they 
would make grasping contact over the course of a trial. 
Users were prevented from observing the grasping task so as 
287
  
to rely solely on their sense of touch in detecting the 
grasping force.  
The force data was acquired by the same multi-threaded, 
real-time controller (CompactRIO, cRIO-9022, National 
Instruments Corp.) that was used for the control of the 
instrument. The force data was captured at 50Hz and passed 
to a host PC. Once a user detected the force, they were 
requested to immediately stop grasping and depress a push 
button indicating that they had made contact. This push 
button generated a binary value which was also logged by 
the controller and synchronized with the force data. The 
local maxima of the force measurement, prior to the 
threshold logging, was taken to be the force detection 
threshold. The F/T sensor was zeroed before each user trial. 
The experiment trials were repeated five times for both the 
conventional and force-feedback forceps. The order in which 
the trials were conducted was also randomized to prevent 
biasing of the results. A force-amplification factor of ?30 
was used in the trials in which the force-feedback forceps 
were used. The results of the experiment are presented as a 
box and whisker plot in Fig. 7. and a summary of the results 
are provided in Table II. 
 
 
Fig. 7.  Box and whisker plot showing the distribution of measured grasping 
force thresholds for the 8 users in which conventional and force-feedback 
forceps were used in the experiment. 
TABLE II 
COMPARISON OF FORCE THRESHOLDS FOR GRASPING WITH CONVENTIONAL 
AND FORCE-FEEDBACK MICROSURGICAL FORCEPS 
 Conventional 
Force-
Feedback 
 
Mean Force  
Threshold (mN) 
 
Maximum Observed  
Force Threshold (mN) 
 
Standard Deviation of Force 
Thresholds (mN) 
 
 
512 
 
 
1221 
 
 
256 
 
41 
 
 
102 
 
 
28 
p-value Comparison of Force 
Thresholds (Kruskal-Wallis) 
 
1.38?10
-14
 
The results of this study show  that the inclusion of 
amplified force-feedback into microsurgical forceps 
significantly improves user perception of force, confirming 
our hypothesis. Both the mean and maximum force 
thresholds are approximately an order of magnitude higher 
when conventional forceps are used over the force-feedback 
prototype. This result can broadly be attributed to the spring 
return mechanism of the forceps, which hinders perception 
of the grasping forces. The force required to depress and 
completely close the tips of the spring-loaded forceps was 
measured to be 1.7N using the F/T sensor. Even for the 
grasping displacements that took place during the 
experiment, it is unsurprising that users could not detect the 
forces generated by the low stiffness spring that were 
considerably lower than the baseline forces required to 
depress the forceps. This is in accordance with the human 
perceptual response that is described by Weber’s law. 
 All force thresholds measured from experiment using the 
force-feedback forceps were made before the soft-spring was 
fully compressed compared to use of the conventional 
forceps in which users always fully compressed the soft-
spring and made contact with the much stiffer wire before 
perceiving the grasping force. This explains the band 
separating the highest threshold measured with the force-
feedback forceps and the lowest threshold measured with the 
conventional forceps. The distribution of force thresholds 
measured with conventional forceps was also greater than 
with the force-feedback device, with standard deviations of 
256mN and 28mN respectively. This too can be attributed to 
both the ‘filtering’ effect of the low stiffness spring that 
ensured users could perceive force before making contact 
with the higher stiffness wire as well as randomization of the 
grasping distance which allowed variation in the total 
amount of force that could be exerted on to the wire.  
The use of a higher stiffness wire will have led to errors in 
the force threshold measurements in the experiment using 
conventional forceps as a result of the user reaction times. 
This is because a large force would be generated over a 
small displacement which would give the users less time to 
respond to perceiving of the grasping force. Moreover, 
variations in the speed with which users closed the forceps 
will have also contributed to the variations in the force 
thresholds measured. There were also variations in the force 
threshold perceived between different users which can also 
be attributed to factors such as variations in the grasping 
speed as well as the intrinsic perception abilities of different 
users. However, there is considerably less inter-user 
variation for the experiment that evaluated the force-
feedback forceps, which is also in accordance with Weber’s 
law. It is true that had the users been allowed to complete the 
study with visual feedback, they would have inevitably been 
able to perceive grasping contact at much lower force 
thresholds. However, in bimanual surgical tasks such as 
micro anastomosis, the surgeon cannot rely on visual 
feedback throughout if they are to avoid becoming 
cognitively overburdened.  
CONCLUSION 
This paper has presented a novel microsurgical forceps 
design that incorporates amplified force-feedback. The use 
of a customized force sensor assembly that is sensitive over 
a range of 0-300mN allows for force amplification factors of 
288
  
up to ?50. This represents a significant improvement upon 
our previous force-amplifying device [12]. Furthermore, the 
force-feedback forceps were evaluated in a user study which 
validated their ability to reduce the force threshold at which 
grasping can be perceived. Such a device has potential 
clinical applications in neurosurgery and vascular 
microsurgery when delicate anatomical structures must be 
handled by the operating surgeon. Excessive application of 
force can lead to catastrophic trauma to the patient, for 
example in the handling of eloquent brain tissue, aneurysms, 
and during vascular micro anastomosis.  
Future derivatives of this device could benefit from many 
improvements. There is great scope for miniaturization of 
the design so as to reduce weight and inertia through design 
optimization and a smaller actuator. This is also important in 
preventing muscle fatigue in the operator. Future designs 
that use precision manufacturing techniques would allow 
miniaturization and facilitate a key step towards producing a 
clinically-viable device.  
The grasping force sensing is crucial in providing 
effective force-amplification of milli-newton scale force 
levels and many improvements to the sensor are required in 
future embodiments. An improved calibration method such 
as the one adopted in [13] would also provide greater 
quantification of the force sensing resolution. The addition 
of a second force sensor to the second forceps tip would also 
provide redundancy as well as the ability to sense lateral 
loads in the plane of the grasping. Additionally, sensing of 
the lateral loads perpendicular to grasping would also prove 
useful, especially for use in micro anastomosis when the 
surgeon’s perception of lateral loads is important in 
controlling suture tension. Future work is also required to 
assess the device’s bandwidth and system stability. 
In summary, this paper presents force-feedback forceps 
that have the ability to improve human perception of the 
delicate grasping tasks encountered during microsurgery.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The authors would like to acknowledge Petros Giataganas 
and Sandra Shurey for their assistance to this research.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R.  Taylor,  P.  Jensen,  L.  Whitcomb,  A.  Barnes,  R.  Kumar,  
D.Stoianovici, P. Gupta, Z. Wang, E. de Juan, Jr., and L. Kavoussi, “A  
steady-hand  robotic  system  for microsurgical  augmentation,”  Int.  
J. Robot. Res., vol.18, pp. 1201–1210, 1999. 
[2] R. A. Maclachlan, B. C. Becker, J. C. Tabarés, G. W. Podnar, L. A. 
Lobes, and C. N. Riviere, “Micron: an actively stabilized handheld 
tool for microsurgery.,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 195–
212, Feb. 2012 
[3] B. C. Becker, S. Voros, L. A. Lobes, J. T. Handa, G. D. Hager, and C.  
N.  Riviere, “Retinal  vessel  cannulation  with  an  image-guided 
handheld  robot,”  in Proc. IEEE EMBS, 2010. 
[4] J. C. Tabarés, R. MacLachlan, C. Ettensohn and C. N. Riviere, “Cell  
micromanipulation  with  an  active  handheld  micromanipulator,”  in 
Proc.  Int.  Conf.  IEEE  Eng.  Med.  Biol. Soc., pp. 4363–4366, 2010. 
[5] B. C. Becker, R. A. MacLachlan, L. A. Lobes, G. D. Hager, and C. N. 
Riviere, “Vision-based control of a handheld surgical 
micromanipulator with virtual fixtures,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 29, 
no. 3, pp. 674–68, Jun. 2013. 
[6] C. Song, D. Y. Park, P. L. Gehlbach, S. J. Park and J. U. Kang. 
“Fiber-optic OCT sensor guided smart micro-forceps for 
microsurgery,” Biomedical Optics Express, vol. 4, no. 7, pp 1045-
1050, 2013. 
[7] C. J. Payne, K-W. Kwok and G-Z. Yang, “An ungrounded hand-held 
surgical device incorporating active constraints with force-feedback” 
in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems, pp. 2559-2565, 2013. 
[8] P. K. Gupta, P. S. Jensen and E. Juan, “Surgical forces and tactile 
perception during retinal microsurgery,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 
1679, pp. 1218–1225, 1999. 
[9] S. E. Salcudean, S. Ku and G. Bell, “Performance measurement in 
scaled teleoperation for microsurgery,” Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 
1205, pp. 789–798, 1997. 
[10] G. Stetten, B. Wu, R. Klatzky, J. Galeotti, M. Siegel, R. Lee, F. Mah,  
A. Eller,  J. Schuman  and R. Hollis,  “Hand-held  force magnifier  for 
surgical instruments,” in Proc. IPCAI, LNCS 6689, 2011. 
[11] R. Lee, B. Wu, R. Klatzky, V. Shivaprabhu, J. Galeotti, S. Horvath, 
M. Siegel, J. Schuman, R. Hollis and G. Stetten, “Hand-held force 
magnifier for surgical instruments: evolution toward a clinical 
device,” in Proc. Augmented Environments for Computer Assisted 
Intervention, vol. 7815, pp. 77-89, 2013. 
[12] C. J. Payne, W. T. Latt, and G-Z. Yang, “A new hand-held force 
amplifying device for micromanipulation,” IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation, pp. 1583 – 1588, 2012. 
[13] I. Iordachita Z. Sun, M. Balicki, J. U. Kang, S. J. Phee, J. Handa, P. 
Gehlbach and R. Taylor, “A sub-millimetric, 0.25 mN resolution fully 
integrated ﬁber-optic force-sensing tool for retinal microsurgery,” Int. 
J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 4, pp. 383–390, 2009. 
[14] A. Uneri, M. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. Taylor, and I. 
Iordachita, “New steady-hand eye robot with micro-force sensing for 
vitreoretinal surgery,” in Proc. Biomedical Robotics and 
Biomechatronics.,  pp. 814 –819, 2010. 
[15] B. Gonenc, M.A. Balicki, J. Handa, P Gehlbach, C. Riviere, R. 
Taylor, I. Iordachita, "Preliminary evaluation of a micro force sensing 
handheld robot for vitreoretinal surgery," in Proc. IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems., pp. 4125 
– 4130,  2012. 
[16] X. He, M. A. Balicki, J. U. Kang, P. L. Gehlbach, J. T. Handa, R. H.  
Taylor, and I. Iordachita, “Force sensing micro-forceps with 
integrated fiber bragg grating for vitreoretinal surgery,” in Proc. SPIE, 
vol. 8218, pp. 82180W–82180W–7, Feb 2012. 
[17] I. Kuru, B. Gonenc, M. Balicki, J. Handa, P. Gehlbach, R. H. Taylor, 
and I. Iordachita, “Force sensing microforceps for robot assisted 
retinal surgery,” in Proc. IEEE Conference on Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, pp.1401–1404, 2012. 
[18] P. J. Berkelman, L. J. Whitcomb, R. H. Taylor, P. Jensen, “A 
miniature microsurgical instrument tip force sensor for enhanced force 
feedback during robot-assisted manipulation,” IEEE Trans. Robot. 
Autom., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 917–921, Oct. 2003. 
[19] K. Kim, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and Y. Sun, “Nanonewton force-controlled 
manipulation of biological cells using a monolithic MEMS 
microgripper with two-axis force feedback,” J. Micromech. 
Microeng., vol. 18, pp. 055013-1–055013-8, 2008. 
[20] M. C. Carrozza, A. Eisinberg, A. Menciassi, D. Campolo, S. Micera, 
and P. Dario, “Toward a force-controlled microgripper for assembling 
biomedical microdevices,” J. Micromech. Microeng., vol. 10, pp.271–
276, 2000. 
[21] A. Menciassi, A. Eisinberg, M. Mazzoni, and P. Dario, “A sensorized 
µelectro discharge machined superelastic alloy microgripper for 
micromanipulation: simulation and characterization,” in Proc. 
IEEE/RSJ Int.Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, vol. 2, pp. 1591–
1595, 2002. 
[22] Y. Kurita, F. Sugihara, J. Ueda, and T. Ogasawara, “Piezoelectric 
tweezer-type end-effector with force and displacement sensing 
capability,” IEEE/ASME Trans. on Mechatronics, vol. 16, pp. 1039 – 
1048, 2011. 
[23] C. J. Payne, H. Rafii-Tari and G-Z. Yang, “A force-feedback system 
for endovascular catheterisation,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 1298-1304, 2012. 
[24] Y. Koseki, D. D. Lorenzo, and K. Chinzei, “Coaxial needle insertion 
assistant for epidural puncture,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 2584–2589, 2011. 
 
289
