  
For example, in the 3-URS robot three potential strategies 
for removing actuators from the robot’s legs were detailed 
(Fig. 3). Fig. 6 shows the resulting reaction forces for each of 
the strategies. The passive hip joint (Fig. 6a) requires the 
contact point to be near the hip to prevent the foot from 
slipping, undesirably reducing our static stability margin [25]. 
The coupled joints (Fig. 6c) are better, but synthesizing a leg 
with coupled joints whose instant center is generally above the 
contact point is non-trivial. A potentially easier solution would 
be to leave the knee passive (Fig. 6b) and, since the force is 
aligned with the distal leg link, simply keep that link as close 
to vertical as possible. 
One strategy for achieving a nominally vertical distal leg 
link is through the use of springs to create a virtual 4-bar 
parallel linkage between the two planar joints (Fig. 7). In the 
absence of torques about the knee, the springs provide a 
kinematic suggestion to the leg keeping the distal link vertical 
throughout its workspace. The springs also allow for the leg to 
resist some net torque about the knee depending on the specific 
geometry and spring stiffness used. 
C. Summary 
When designing a robot for exactly-constrained 
locomotion, several stability criteria specific to this case 
emerge, namely, architectural singularities, ill-conditioned 
configurations, and configurations in which the ground 
reaction forces implied by the choice of passive DOFs would 
tend to cause instability.  We have shown that simple passive 
structures such as a sprung parallel 4-bar linkage could be used 
to improve robot stability. 
IV.  EXPERIMENTAL CONCEPT DEMONSTRATION 
A. Prototype Design 
In order to verify the feasibility of exactly constrained 
robot walking, a prototype robot was constructed based on the 
design considerations and principles outlined above as a proof-
of-concept, shown in Fig. 8.  The simplest robot with a 3-
legged stance set would have a total of 4 legs, with one leg 
being transferred per gait step to shift the weight of the robot 
to a new stance tripod. A four-legged walker is not particularly 
efficient at walking, but it is capable of demonstrating the 
stability and mobility of a tripod stance, and the stability of 
support transitions. 
The prototype was built with 4 URS legs constructed using 
3D-printed parts (Stratasys ABSplus). The universal hip joints 
of each leg were arranged in a square pattern 30 mm on a side, 
with the yaw axis of each hip oriented vertically. Both hip 
joints were actuated with Robotis Dynamixel RX-28 servo 
motors. The knee joints are passive, and were connected to the 
body with a four-bar parallel elastic linkage, as shown in Fig. 
8, to ensure that the robot’s legs stay parallel to the z axis of 
the robot body while in swing phase. The proximal leg links 
are 150 mm long, and the distal links are 160 mm long. At the 
end of each leg, a molded rubber foot improves the frictional 
contact with the ground, so that the assumption of no-slip point 
contact with the ground is reasonable.  
B. Gait Design 
Because it is easy to maneuver the walker into a 
configuration where the constraints from the passive knee 
joints are singular (as in Fig. 4) or ill-conditioned (vis. Fig. 5), 
and because only one leg of the walker could be repositioned 
at a time, the choice of gait for this robot was highly 
constrained. Figure 9 shows the tripod gait, with a step length 
of roughly ? body length, that was used to control the robot. 
Three legs were held widely apart, and one of the two rear legs 
was used during each step to support the body while the front 
legs were repositioned. Body motion was achieved by using 
the tripod as a parallel platform to reposition the body in 
between stance changes.  A robot with more legs would allow 
 
Figure 7.  Potential URS leg design for nominally vertical distal link – 
sprung parallel 4-bar linkage between planar joints.  The springs allow 
the foot to resist torques about the passive knee joint as well. 
 
Figure 6.  Reaction forces for underactuated URS legs: (a) passive 
planar hip joint, (b) passive knee joint, and (c) coupled planar hip and 
knee joints. Note how each force passes through the leg’s instant center 
of rotation. 
  
Figure 8.  Illustration of the prototype 4-URS exactly constrained 
walking robot.  Note the passive knee with a sprung virtual parallel 4-
bar linkage for stability. 
2987
  
for more flexibility when synthesizing gaits, both in terms of 
simultaneously repositioning several legs as well as avoiding 
architectural singularities. 
C. Results and Discussion 
The first part of the video attachment to this paper 
demonstrates the ability of three stance phase legs to reposition 
the body with three translational and three rotational degrees 
of freedom. The distal leg links remained mostly vertical 
during these motions, keeping the ground reaction forces from 
leaving the friction cone of the contact with the floor. In 
experiments, little slippage was observed. The problem of 
singular or ill-conditioned passive joint constraints, on the 
other hand, was a noticeable limitation to the range of motion. 
Two legs could not be brought into a position 180 degrees 
from each other as in Fig. 5 without buckling at the knees. 
Because the walker's body center of mass is already close to 
the hip joint, these regions of the workspace were also close to 
the edge of the static support polygon, and so did not reduce 
the size of the workspace relative to the support polygon area. 
However, in a wider-bodied robot having the same legs, it may 
be possible to see a more substantial reduction in body motion 
relative to the support area. 
The locomotive gait diagrammed in Fig. 9 is also 
demonstrated in the second part of the video attachment, 
playing at 1x speed. Frames from an overhead view of the 
walking experiments are shown for comparison at the bottom 
of Fig. 9. Walking was observed to be stable up to the 
limitations imposed by the maximum speed of the actuators. 
Some static friction was observed in the elastic parallel four-
bar mechanism keeping the distal links of each leg vertical, but 
this did not degrade stance stability significantly. Because the 
legs had to be repositioned one by one, the rate of body motion 
per step was small. This was anticipated, as the stance tripod 
can only be altered one at a time. A larger, six-legged walker 
capable of moving multiple legs per step is planned, that will 
enable a more in-depth exploration of gait synthesis with 
exactly-constrained support legs. 
D. Summary 
These preliminary results show that standing, body 
repositioning, and walking are possible with exactly-
constrained walking robots. The main purpose of these 
experiments was to explore the stance stability, and to verify 
that the elastic four-bar mechanisms positioning the passive 
leg joints in swing phase enabled repeatable placement of the 
feet. Future iterations of this walking platform will explore 
increasing the number of legs and the size of the robot body, 
to improve gait length, static and dynamic stability, and the 
richness of locomotion primitives available. 
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have demonstrated that fully actuated 
legged robots often employ designs that result in 
overconstrained kinematics when in ground contact. This 
property results in increased weight, complexity, and cost due 
to the number of actuators used, and often requires the use of 
a suspension and complex control schemes to ensure stable 
ground contact. As an alternative, we have presented a general 
strategy for the development of exactly constrained 
kinetostatic walking robots.  Such robots would be lighter, 
cheaper, and simpler to control than overconstrained legged 
robots at the cost of control over the ground forces. 
Using basic metrics for the mobility of mechanisms, we 
can analyze the degree of over-constraint of a particular robot 
or leg design and determine the number of actuators that must 
be removed for an exactly constrained design. Based on the 
number of legs, different actuation and coupling schemes will 
provide exact constraint; however, selecting a preferential 
design requires the consideration of several important factors.  
First, the kinematic design and gait must avoid architectural 
singularities, and we presented one tool from the parallel 
mechanisms community for identifying such singularities.  
Additionally, since an exactly constrained walking robot will 
have uniquely determined ground reaction forces, the selected 
design must ensure stable ground contact. 
A simple 4-URS exactly constrained walking robot was 
designed and constructed as a proof-of-concept for such 
  
Figure 9.  Locomotive gait of prototype 4-URS walker.  The number of distinct motions was due to the fact that only one leg could be moved at a time 
as well as the fact that architectural singularities had to be avoided (see Figs. 4-5).  The robot’s configuration in (f) mirrors its configuration in (a). 
2988
  
walkers. The robot demonstrated full mobility and exact 
constraint while in stance and was able to walk using a basic 
gait. This provided strong support for the feasibility of similar 
walkers as well as a wide range of future directions for 
investigation. 
Looking forward, we aim to design and analyze highly 
capable exactly constrained walkers. This will involve the 
investigation of alternative leg architectures, the consequences 
of differently sized stance sets, and the analysis of a wide range 
of different actuation schemes to ensure exact constraint. We 
would also like to take a more rigorous look into the use of 
passive elements such as springs to increase the effective 
workspace of such robots and their effect on the performance 
of the robot. Additionally, we will perform a study of different 
gait and control scheme to maximize the robot’s stability and 
performance over a variety of terrains and while using both 
static and dynamic gaits. Finally, we intend to study the 
feasibility of lower-mobility robots; reducing the number of 
independent DOFs of the robot’s body’s workspace in the 
stance phase would allow us to further reduce the number of 
actuators used, and it is not clear that effective locomotion 
requires all 6 spatial DOFs to be independently controlled. 
Through all this, we hope to develop much more efficient 
high-performance legged robots for locomotion over a variety 
of terrains and in applications such as extra-terrestrial 
exploration or disaster response. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank Julia Borras-Sol for her 
helpful discussions regarding parallel manipulators and 
mobility. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Platt et al., “Null-Space Grasp Control: Theory and Experiments,” 
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 26, pp. 282-295, Apr. 2010. 
[2] M. R. Cutkosky and I. Kao, “Computing and controlling compliance of 
a robotic hand,” IEEE Trans. Robot. Autom., vol. 5, pp. 151-165, Apr. 
1989. 
[3] M. Kalakrishnan et al., “Learning force control policies for compliant 
manipulation,” in Proc. 2011 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots 
and Systems, San Francisco, CA, 2011, pp. 4639-4644. 
[4] B. Klaassen et al., “Biomimetic walking robot SCORPION: Control 
and modeling,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 41, no. 2-3, pp. 69-76, Nov. 
2002. 
[5] K. Arikawa and S. Hirose, “Deveopment of Quadruped Walking Robot 
TITAN-VIII,” in Proc. 1996 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and 
Systems, Osaka, 1996, pp. 208-214. 
[6] J. A. Gálvez et al., “SILO4 – A versatile quadruped robot for research 
in force distribution,” in Proc. 3
rd
 Int. Conf. Climbing and Walking 
Robots and the Support Technologies for Mobile Machines, 2000, pp. 
371-383.  
[7] M. Raibert et al., “Bigdog, the rough-terrain quadruped robot,” in Proc. 
Int.. Federation of Automatic Control Congr., Seoul, South Korea, 
2008, pp. 10822-10825. 
[8] M. P. Murphy et al., “The LittleDog Robot,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 30, 
no. 2, pp. 145-149, Feb. 2011. 
[9] U. Saranli et al., “RHex: A Simple and Highly Mobile Hexapod Robot,” 
Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 616-631, Jul. 2001. 
[10] S. Kim et al., “iSprawl: Design and Tuning for High-speed Autonomous 
Open-loop Running,” Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 25, no. 9, pp. 903-912, 
Sept. 2006. 
[11] J. Pratt et al., “Virtual Model Control of a Bipedal Walking Robot,” in 
Proc. 1997 IEEE Int. Conf. Robots and Automation, Albuquerque, NM, 
1997, pp. 193-198. 
[12] J. E. Pratt and G. A. Pratt, “Exploiting Natural Dynamics in the Control 
of a Planar Bipedal Walking Robot,” in Proc. Thirty-Sixth Annu. 
Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, 
IL, 1998, pp. 739-748. 
[13] G. A. Pratt and M. M. Williamson, “Series elastic actuators,” in Proc. 
1995 IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems, Pittsburgh, 
PA, 1995, pp. 399-406. 
[14] J. K. Salisbury and B. Roth, “Kinematic and Force Analysis of 
Articulated Mechanical Hands,” J. Mech. Transm.-T. ASME, vol. 105, 
no. 1, pp. 35-41, Mar. 1983. 
[15] K. H. Hunt, Kinematic Geometry of Mechanisms, London: Oxford 
Univ. Press, 1978. 
[16] D. C. Kar, “Design of Statically Stable Walking Robot: A Review,” J. 
Robotic Syst., vol. 20, no. 11, pp. 671-686, Nov. 2003. 
[17] J. Angeles et al., “Singularity Analysis of Three-Legged, Six-DOF 
Platform Manipulators With URS Legs,” IEEE Trans. Mechatron., vol. 
8, pp. 469-475, Dec. 2003. 
[18] Z. Huang et al., Theory of Parallel Mechanisms, New York: Springer, 
2013. 
[19] L.-W. Tsai, Robot Analysis: The Mechanics of Serial and Parallel 
Manipulators, New York, NY: Wiley, 1999. 
[20] J. S. Dai et al., “Mobility of Overconstrained Parallel Mechanisms,” J. 
Mech. Design, vol. 128, no. 1, pp. 220-229, Jan. 2006. 
[21] R. S. Ball, A Treatise on the Theory of Screws, Cambridge: Cambridge 
Univ. Press, 1900. 
[22] J. K. Davidson and K. H. Hunt, Robots and Screw Theory: Applications 
of Kinematics and Statics to Robotics, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press, 
2004. 
[23] H. Lipkin and J. Duffy, “The Elliptic Polarity of Screws,” J. Mech. 
Transm.-T. ASME, vol. 107, no. 3, pp. 377-386, Sept. 1985. 
[24] R. M. Murray et al., A Mathematical Introduction to Robotic 
Manipulation, London: CRC Press, 1994. 
[25] E. Garcia et al., “A comparative study of stability margins for walking 
machines,” Robotica, vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 595-606, Nov. 2002.  
 
2989
