Extrinsic Dexterity: In-Hand Manipulation with External Forces
Nikhil Chavan Daﬂe
1
, Alberto Rodriguez
1
, Robert Paolini
2
, Bowei Tang
2
, Siddhartha S. Srinivasa
2
Michael Erdmann
2
, Matthew T. Mason
2
, Ivan Lundberg
3
, Harald Staab
3
and Thomas Fuhlbrigge
3
1
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
2
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
3
ABB Corporate Research Center
(nikhilcd, albertor)@mit.edu,(rpaolini, boweit)@cmu.edu, (siddh, me, matt.mason)@cs.cmu.edu,
ivan.lundberg@se.abb.com, (harald.staab,thomas.a.fuhlbrigge)@us.abb.com
Abstract—“In-hand manipulation” is the ability to reposition
an object in the hand, for example when adjusting the grasp of
a hammer before hammering a nail. The common approach to
in-hand manipulation with robotic hands, known as dexterous
manipulation [1], is to hold an object within the ﬁngertips
of the hand and wiggle the ﬁngers, or walk them along the
object’s surface. Dexterous manipulation, however, is just one
of the many techniques available to the robot. The robot can
also roll the object in the hand by using gravity, or adjust
the object’s pose by pressing it against a surface, or if fast
enough, it can even toss the object in the air and catch it in a
different pose. All these techniques have one thing in common:
they rely on resources extrinsic to the hand, either gravity,
external contacts or dynamic arm motions. We refer to them
as “extrinsic dexterity”.
In this paper we study extrinsic dexterity in the context
of regrasp operations, for example when switching from a
power to a precision grasp, and we demonstrate that even
simple grippers are capable of ample in-hand manipulation.
We develop twelve regrasp actions, all open-loop and hand-
scripted, and evaluate their effectiveness with over 1200 trials
ofregraspsandsequencesofregrasps,forthreedifferentobjects
(see video [2]). The long-term goal of this work is to develop a
general repertoire of these behaviors, and to understand how
such a repertoire might eventually constitute a general-purpose
in-hand manipulation capability.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the robotics research literature “dexterity” often refers
to the manipulation of an object in the hand, with the hand.
By “extrinsic dexterity” we mean the manipulation of an
object in the hand, using resources extrinsic to the hand. For
example, if you tilt your hand so that an object rolls from
your ﬁngertips to your palm, you are using gravity, not just
yourhand.Ifyoupresstwochopsticksagainstthetabletopto
even them up, you are using the surface of the table and arm
motions, not just your hand. If you toss an object upwards
from your palm and catch it in your ﬁngertips (Fig. 1), you
are using object inertia and arm acceleration, not just your
hand. In each case, you can do more, better, or faster by
exploiting resources extrinsic to the hand.
Manipulation with extrinsic dexterity stands in contrast
to the “dexterous hands” approach, which manipulates the
This work was supported by National Science Foundation [NSF-IIS-
0916557],ArmyResearchLaboratory[W911NF-10-2-0016]andABB.This
work does not necessarily reﬂect the position or the policy of the U.S.
Government or ARL. No ofﬁcial endorsement should be inferred.
Fig. 1. Throw-to-ﬁngertip regrasp. A high robot arm acceleration throws
the object into the air for the ﬁngers to catch.
object through ﬁnely controlled ﬁngertip contacts. The dex-
terous hands approach started with Salisbury’s work [1], and
has been thoroughly analyzed and extended since then. (See
[3] for an overview of the work up to 2000). Given that it
relies on resources intrinsic to the hand, we refer to it as
“intrinsic dexterity”.
Extrinsic dexterity complements the intrinsic capabilities
of the hand. In particular it is well suited to address tasks
that require a signiﬁcant adjustment of the object in the
hand, such as the change from a power to a precision
grasp [4] (Fig. 1), traditionally difﬁcult to attain by the
dextrous hands approach. In this paper we describe 12 such
regrasps, all open-loop and hand-coded, and all relying on
external resources. The long term goal of this work is to
develop a repertoire of regrasp actions sufﬁcient to reach
any grasp type from any other in a given grasp taxonomy—
a repertoire to navigate the grasp taxonomy.
We represent the regrasp capability induced by such a
repertoire with a grasp graph containing a directed arc for
every regrasp (see example in Fig. 2). This paper only
addresses a few speciﬁc grasps and objects for a given hand.
Generalizing these actions so they can be applied across a
broad range of grasps, objects, and hands, is an enormous
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1578
 
 
Throw and Flip
Place and Pick
Place and Pick
     Place and Pick
   Place and Pick
Drop in Hand
  
  
 
 
Throw to Palm
   
  
 
 
 
  
Throw to Fingertip
Throw to Palm
Throw to Palm
Throw to Fingertip
Roll to Palm
Place and Pick
Throw to Fingertip
   Place and Pick
Roll to Ground
Drop in Hand
Fig. 2. Grasp graph for a triangular prism. Solid arrows represent implemented regrasps while dashed arrows indicate future ones.
challenge.Nonethelessextrinsicdexterityhasadvantagesthat
justify this work. Extrinsic dexterity offers an incomparable
ability to change grasps. In addition, by exploiting resources
extrinsic to the hand, we shift part of the complexity of the
manipulator to a possibly modular and adaptable environ-
ment. This allows the use of simpler hands which can be
cheaper, lighter, smaller, and readily available.
II. RELATED WORK
This paper explores the application of extrinsic dexterity
to regrasping objects. The dominant approach to regrasp
is to avoid it. Manufacturing automation avoids regrasp
through the design of specialized grippers, part feeders,
work-holding ﬁxtures, and tools [5]. Avoidance of regrasp
is also a common consideration in the design of surgical
instruments and procedures [6].
Nonetheless, robotics researchers have studied regrasp for
a long time. The importance of regrasp was noted by Paul
et al., and is readily apparent in the Instant Insanity demon-
stration [7, 8], and the Handey project [9, 10]. Both systems
ﬁt within the “pick-and-place” paradigm of autonomous
manipulation, which rearranges the world by picking and
placing one object at a time.
Dexterous manipulation, originally formulated by Salis-
bury [11, 1, 12] and contrary to the discrete nature of
the pick-and-place approach, relies on the application of
continuous controlled forces to the object through the ﬁn-
gertips. In Salisbury’s formulation the hand attains local
controllability of an object by assuming three ﬁngers in point
contact with the object, and three actuators per ﬁnger. Such
a hand is often referred to as a dexterous hand. Subsequent
work relaxed those assumptions to include rolling [13, 14],
sliding [15], ﬁnger gaiting [16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21], and
global controllability of object orientation [22, 23]. Despite
numerous generalizationsto Salisbury’swork, fewattempt to
alleviate the need for full hand actuation. A recent exception
is by Odhner and Dollar [24] who demonstrate reduced local
controllability of the object with an underactuated hand.
Most relevant to this paper is the work that exploits
external resources for actuation, being in-hand manipulation
one possible application. The more general use of external
resources was noted by Lynch and Mason [25]:
“Other useful sources of control forces include
gravity, the frictional kinematic constraints (ﬂoor,
walls, obstacles) making up the robots environ-
ment, and dynamic forces. If the robot can reason
about these forces, it can use a richer set of ma-
nipulation primitives, including pushing, throwing,
and striking.”
We classify prior work by the resource employed: either
externalcontacts,gravity,ordynamicmotions.Thefollowing
subsections explore those three categories.
A. Quasistatic actions (with external contacts)
Pushing against, or following, a ﬂat surface is a common
trick that humans use to align or relocate held objects. The
mechanics of pushing an object under frictional contact with
a ﬂat surface was studied by Mason [26, 27], and later ap-
pliedtomanipulatingpolygonalobjectsintheplane[25],and
topushingobjectsintoanenvelopinggrasp[28].Nilsson[29]
provides an earlier implementation of object manipulation
by pushing and squeezing. Salisbury [30] and Brock [31]
both propose to use external contacts as extra phalanges.
The latter manipulates a held object by controlling the way
itslipswhenpushedagainstanexternalcontact.Paolinietal.
[32] push a grasped cylinder against a ﬂat surface to relocate
it in the hand. In all cases, the environment helps to provide
the wrench required to manipulate the object.
B. Passive Dynamic actions
Blessing or curse, gravity is a constant source of actuation
that is always present. Erdmann and Mason [33] use it to
manipulate a planar object lying on a tray by controlling its
tilt. Erdmann [34] later uses it to manipulate a 3D object of
unknowngeometrylyingagainsttwopalms.Bothworksplan
transitions between a sequence of contact modes, relying on
gravity to provide the wrench acting on the object.
1579
C. Active Dynamic actions
Finally, we can manipulate an object held in the hand by
relying on its inertia, and the effect of dynamic motions of
the driving manipulator. We like to think that the powerful
and precise arm actuators are repurposed to compensate for
the possibly limited complexity of the hand.
Dynamic actions include throwing, catching, and juggling.
Aboafetal.[35,36]andBurridgeetal.[37]exploredcontrol
strategies and learning techniques applied to catching and
juggling. Starting from a more general formulation, Lynch
and Mason [38] demonstrated controllability and planning of
a variety of dynamic manipulation actions such as throwing,
catching and rolling. They referred to this set of skills as
“dynamic dexterity”. Another interesting mode of dynamic
non-prehensile manipulation, explored by Bohringer et al.
[39] and Vose et al. [40], is the use of friction force ﬁelds
generated by custom vibration patterns to manipulate objects
in the plane.
III. TERMINOLOGY
This paper uses the terms grasp pose, grasp type, regrasp,
andgraspgraph.Althoughwedonotneedprecisedeﬁnitions
for them, we want to give an idea of what they refer
to. Our usage doesn’t align perfectly with any previous
work, but comes close to Zhang et al. [41]. Throughout, we
assume there is a hand, with an associated hand reference
frame, holding a single rigid object. We refer by in-hand
manipulation to any way of moving the object with respect
to the hand frame.
By grasp pose we mean the conﬁguration of the system
relative to the hand frame. This includes the pose of the
object relative to the hand, and the conﬁguration of the hand.
In this paper, we use a simple hand [42] with three rigid
ﬁngers compliantly coupled to a single actuator. Each ﬁnger
has a single joint, so the grasp pose is encoded as the object
pose plus the three ﬁnger joint angles.
By regrasp we mean any action transferring the system
from one grasp pose to another.
By grasp type we mean a subset of grasp pose space, like
for example those commonly identiﬁed in a grasp taxonomy
as “spherical enveloping” or “prismatic ﬁngertip” [43].
Wedeﬁnethegraspgraphasthedirectedgraphwithgrasp
types as vertices and regrasp actions as edges.
IV. REGRASP ACTIONS
This section catalogs the regrasp actions we implemented,
working from the easy and familiar to the challenging and
novel. All actions are implemented by a simple gripper with
three ﬁngers compliantly driven by a single actuator [42].
The hand has very limited “intrinsic dexterity”. In the
absence of contact with the object or the environment, the
hand is only capable of opening and closing, with all three
ﬁngers moving at the same rate.
The only intrinsic regrasp the hand can do is to squeeze
an object, either resting on its palm or on a table. When
the grip is tightened, contacts between hand and object may
shift,leavingtheobjectinamorestableandpredictablepose.
Fig. 3. Push-in-ﬁngers regrasp: A block held between two ﬁngertips rotates
when the block makes contact with a fence.
Despite its simplicity, squeezing is a useful technique often
exploited to reduce the uncertainty in the object’s pose [44,
45].
All other regrasp actions described in this section harness
external resources rather than relying on the hand’s func-
tionality. We divide them into three categories: quasistatic
regrasps aided by contacts with the environment, passive-
dynamic regrasps where the object is manipulated by the
effect of gravity, and active-dynamic regrasps where fast
arm motions use object inertia to reconﬁgure the object (see
video [2]).
A. Quasistatic with External Contacts
In this section we describe ﬁve regrasps where the object
is repositioned in the hand by exploiting contacts with the
environment
Fig. 4. Examples of quasistatic regrasps with external contacts: (top) push-
in-enveloping regrasp; (bottom) roll-on-ground regrasp.
1580
Fingertip grasp Place on ground Transit along axis Loose fi ngertip grasp Raise the hand Raise the hand Center by Place and pick
Fig. 5. Grasp pose changes involved in droop-in-ﬁngers regrasp.
1) Place-and-Pick: Themostwidelyusedregrasp,bothin
research and industry, is to place the grasped object on a ﬂat
surface or ﬁxture, and pick it up from a different direction.
It ﬁts within the pick-and-place manipulation paradigm and
it is used, for example, in the Instant Insanity demo [7, 46]
and the Handey system [9, 10, 47].
The place-and-pick regrasp is composed of three separate
actions: place, pick, and transit (meaning to move the
hand while the object rests on the ground) each of which
can potentially be considered as an independent regrasp, if
we think of the ﬂat surface as another phalange, and the
ungrasped object as a separate grasp type.
2) Push-in-ﬁngers: (Fig. 3) The goal is to rotate an object
about an axis determined by two ﬁngertip contacts, similar
to Brock’s work [31]. In our implementation, push-in-ﬁngers
rotatesarectangularblock90degreesbymovingthegrasped
block along a path obstructed by a fence.
3) Push-in-enveloping: (Fig. 4 top) The goal is to slide
an object held in an enveloping grasp. The hand holds the
object loosely against the palm and moves until the object
makes contact with a ﬁxture in the environment. A further
motion against the ﬁxture forces the object to slide in the
hand. In previous work Paolini et al. [32] use this regrasp to
relocate a grasped cylinder along its axis. By pressing both
ends against a vertical post, the hand zeroes the uncertainty
in the location of the cylinder along its axis.
4) Roll-on-ground: (Fig. 4 bottom) The goal is to rotate
a cylinder about its main axis prior to picking it up. Start-
ing with the cylinder lying on the ground and in a loose
ﬁngertip grasp, the hand moves parallel to the ground and
perpendicular to the cylinder axis. If we assume slip at the
ﬁngertip contacts, and no slip at the ground contact line,
the cylinder rolls through an angle determined by the hand’s
linear motion.
5) Droop-in-ﬁngers: (Fig. 5) The goal is to rotate a long
thin object from an initial orientation parallel to the palm, to
a ﬁnal orientation perpendicular to the palm. For example,
the hand might need to grasp a cylinder lying on the ground,
and then insert it in a hole, requiring a change of grasp. The
technique, illustrated in Fig. 5, involves grasping one end of
the object loosely and lifting slowly. If the grasp is loose
enough, the object’s weight causes the object to pivot in the
ﬁngertips until it is vertical. Only after the pivoting motion
is completed does the other end of the object lift off the
ground, and the object aligns vertically.
B. Passive Dynamic
Here we describe regrasps governed by the dynamics of
the object rolling on the ﬁnger phalanges under the effect
of gravity. During these regrasp actions, the arm does not
move at all, which avoids the need for synchronization
betweenarmandhandmotions.Theoutcomeisconsequently
determined by the initial poses of hand and object.
Fig. 6. Examples of passive dynamic regrasps with no arm motion: (top)
roll-to-ﬁngertip regrasp; (bottom) roll-to-ground regrasp
1) Roll-to-ﬁngertip: (Fig. 6 top) The goal is to move the
object from an enveloping grasp to a ﬁngertip grasp by
rolling on the ﬁngers. The ﬁnal pose can be adjusted by
modifying the ﬁnal opening of the hand. Fig. 6 (top) shows
the application to a cylinder.
2) Roll-to-ground: (Fig. 6 bottom) The goal is to move
the object from a ﬁngertip grasp to rest on the ground, after
some rotation. Fig. 6 (bottom) shows the application to a
triangularprismwitharotationof90degrees.Roll-to-ground
is more ﬂexible than roll-to-ﬁngertip, since the magnitude of
the rotation is less limited by the length of the phalanges or
the size of the hand.
1581
Fig. 7. Roll-to-palm regrasp: Transition from ﬁngertip to enveloping with 90 degree rotation.
3) Roll-to-palm: (Fig. 7) Opposite to roll-to-ﬁngertip, the
object moves from a ﬁngertip grasp to an enveloping grasp
by rolling on the ﬁngers. In Fig. 7 we show the application
to a triangular prism. The rolling motion yields an offset
rotation of 90 degrees.
C. Active Dynamic
The most challenging regrasp maneuvers involve arm
motion coordinated with a dynamic motion of the object, as
in [38, 48]. The most straightforward is a self-throw, where
the object is thrown into the air and regrasped, which in
theory could be used for almost any imaginable regrasp and
for any object shape. The main challenges are sensitivity to
initial conditions or throwing motion, and the careful timing
required between arm, ﬁnger, and object.
Working in the earth’s gravitational ﬁeld means that an
object in free fall has an acceleration of 1g, and the robot
arm must be capable of comparable or higher accelerations
to overcome it. It is unfortunate that many robot arms are
not capable of such acceleration. By human standards it is
not particularly high. By employing the whole body, baseball
pitchersattainaccelerationsinexcessof100g[49].Morerel-
evant, ordinary humans can easily attain hand accelerations
exceeding6gusingelbowmotionalone,asanyonecanverify
with the accelerometer in a smart phone.
Fig. 8. Examples of active dynamic regrasps with arm motion: (top) throw-
to-palm regrasp; (bottom) throw-and-ﬂip regrasp.
Here we show a few variations of the self-throw idea:
1) Throw-to-palm: (Fig. 8 top) The goal is to transfer the
object from a ﬁngertip to an enveloping grasp, essential to
many applications that require a ﬁrm grasp on an object. In
our implementation, the robot holds the object in a ﬁngertip
grasp with the ﬁngers pointed up and a horizontal palm.
While the ﬁngers open and the object drops, the arm is
accelerated downward and then upward, in a proﬁle that
reduces the velocity mismatch at impact, helping the object
settleintoastablepose.Seethepositionandvelocityproﬁles
in Fig. 9. In practice, it is impossible to match velocities
perfectly and some small bouncing remains. Recordings at
240 frames per second conﬁrm that the arm’s motion does
substantially reduce bouncing.
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
Time (Second)
Z  Coordiante (mm)
Object gripped at 20.00 mm from palm
Object
Robot
Object gripped at 20.00 mm from palm
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35
?2000
?1600
?1200
?800
?400
0
Time (Second)
Velocity (mm/sec)
Object gripped at 20.00 mm from palm
Object
Robot
Fig. 9. Position (left) and velocity (right) of hand and object during throw-
to-palm. The plan is for the object to touch the palm after 0.2sec, with
matching velocities and positive acceleration of the palm.
2) Throw-to-ﬁngertip: (Fig. 1) A more challenging task is
to transfer the object from an enveloping grasp to a ﬁngertip
graspbyaself-throw.Thehandstartswiththeﬁngersopened
and pointed up, and the object resting on the palm. The
hand is then accelerated upwards and then downwards at 2g
throwing the object into the air. The ﬁngers are then closed
with the timing tuned to grip the object in the ﬁngertips.
3) Throw-and-ﬂip: (Fig.8bottom)Evenmorechallenging
is to change the grasp orientation while the object is in
the air. In this maneuver, the object starts and ends in an
enveloping grasp, but with an object rotation. Throw-and-
ﬂip was ﬁrst observed empirically during the development
of throw-to-ﬁngertip for the triangular prism, and then tuned
for performance and reliability. The prism is tossed in the air
and during its fall it makes contact with the ﬁngertips which
causes it to rotate 90 degrees before falling into the palm.
4) Vibration: The goal is to attain a more predictable
object pose by using vibration or dither to reduce the effect
of friction.
1582
Roll-on-ground
(Rotation about axis)
Thorw-to-fingertip
Roll-to-fingertip
Throw-to-palm
Roll-to-fingertip
Push-in-enveloping
(Tranlation
along axis)
Push-in-fi ngers
Droop-in-fingers
        Push-in-fingertip
(Translation along axis)
Place-pick
(Rotate about axis)
Place-pick
(Rotate about axis)
Place-pick
Thorw-to-fingertip
Place-pick
Throw-to-palm
Push-in-fingertip
Place-pick
Fig. 10. Grasp graph for a cylinder. Solid arrows represent implemented
regrasps, while dashed arrows show the regrasps that are not yet developed.
V. GRASP GRAPHS AND REGRASP SEQUENCES
For a given hand, a given object, and a give set of grasps
types, we represent the repertoire of regrasp actions as a
directed graph, called grasp graph, each arc corresponding
to a regrasp. Figs. 2 and 10 show example graphs for a
triangular prism and a cylinder respectively. A transition
in the graph indicates the intended change in grasp type.
In practice, failures occur, which brings stochasticity to
the process. In a parallel line of work we are building
stochastic data-driven models of these regrasps to quantify
the expectations associated with grasp transitions.
The focus in this paper however, is to identify interesting
regrasp actions that can be made to work robustly with only
a manageable amount of tuning, and that can be sequenced
to consolidate an in-hand manipulation capability. As seen
in the accompanying video [2], this sometimes requires the
addition of extra steps like squeeze or vibration designed to
reduce uncertainty. In Section VI we evaluate the robustness
of the regrasps and demonstrate examples of sequences.
A. Grasp Graph for a Triangular Prism (Fig. 2)
For the triangular prism in Fig. 2, we deﬁne grasp types
for different choices of the face resting or opposite to
the palm. In some cases, we distinguish between ﬁngertip
and enveloping grasps. We do not differentiate between
symmetrical conﬁgurations of object or hand, although the
graph is easily extended to do so. The grasp graph (Fig. 2) is
strongly connected. If restricted to the actions implemented
and tested for the triangular prism (solid arcs in the ﬁgure),
we have a strongly connected sub-graph including three of
the original 8 grasp types. Fig. 11 shows a sequence of
regrasps exploiting that strong connectivity.
B. Grasp Graph for Cylinder (Fig. 10)
For the cylindrical object, we identiﬁed four interesting
grasp types based on the orientation of the principal axis rel-
Squeeze
Vibration
Roll to Palm
6, 11 Place and Pick
Throw and Flip
 
Throw to Palm
Throw to Fingertip
  
1, 7
2, 8
3, 9
4
5
10
Fig. 11. Sequence of regrasps for a triangular prism. The path starts in
the top-left grasp type and follows the arrows according to their numbers.
ativetothehand—parallelorperpendicular—andonwhether
it was held in a ﬁngertip enveloping conﬁguration. The full
graph, as shown in Fig. 10, is strongly connected.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section describes experiments with individual regrasp
actions and regrasp sequences. For the experiments we use a
simplegripperwiththreerigidﬁngerscompliantlyconnected
to a single motor [42]. The hand is attached to a 6-DOF
industrial manipulator (ABB IRB140) with a maximum
speed of 2.5 m/sec and maximum acceleration of 20 m/sec
2
(? 2g). The workspace is composed of a table covered with
rubber for friction and simple ﬁxtures to support some of the
regrasps. All actions are open loop and tuned by hand.
A. Individual Regrasps
To test the individual regrasp actions, we executed them
50 times in a row. The actions were calibrated and tuned by
hand before the experiment, and then run 50 times at once
without further adjustments. In some cases it was possible to
remove the human from the loop, but typically, before each
trial, a human placed the object as accurately as possible
in a predeﬁned initial pose. Success means that the object
ended in the expected grasp type. Failure means the object
ended in the wrong grasp type, or on the table. Table I shows
the outcome of the experiments. The notes on limitations
or typical failures are based on the authors’ experience in
designing and tuning the regrasps, not just on the formal
50-trial experiments.
We also explored the sensitivity to variations in the initial
pose of the prism for the roll-to-palm action. Beginning with
the prism grasped within the ﬁngertips, as in Fig. 7, we
introduce errors uniformly distributed over ±20 mm in X
and Y, ±3 mm in Z, and ±20 degrees rotation about Z,
being X and Y parallel to the palm and Z perpendicular.
Roll-to-palm was successful 580 out of 600 trials. The most
sensitive directions were translations in Y and Z. Fig. 12
showsthesuccessratioplottedagainstthosetwodimensions.
1583
regrasps effectively requires an understanding of how much
uncertainty it can handle in the input as well as how much
it produces at the output.
Continuing work aims to study the basic principles un-
derlying these actions, to combine analytical models with
empirical data to characterize the operations, to automate the
planning of the arm and hand motions, and to adapt them to
different objects and tasks.
REFERENCES
[1] J. K. Salisbury Jr., “Kinematic and Force Analysis of Articulated
Hands,” PhD Dissertation, Stanford University, 1982.
[2] N. Chavan Daﬂe, A. Rodriguez, R. Paolini, B. Tang, S. Srinivasa,
M. Erdmann, M. Mason, I. Lundberg, H. Staab, and T. Fuhlbrigge,
“Regrasping objects using extrinsic dexterity,” IEEE Int Conf.
on Robotics and Automation, 2014. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.youtube.com/watch?v=WAPgjZCI1gI
[3] A. Bicchi, “Hands for dexterous manipulation and robust grasping:
a difﬁcult road toward simplicity,” IEEE T Robotic Autom, vol. 16,
no. 6, pp. 652–662, 2000.
[4] J. Napier and R. H. Tuttle, Hands. Princeton University Press, 1993.
[5] G. Monkman, S. Hesse, and R. Steinmann, Robot grippers. John
Wiley and Sons, 2007.
[6] M. Kroh, K. El-Hayek, S. Rosenblatt, B. Chand, P. Escobar, J. Kaouk,
and S. Chalikonda, “First human surgery with a novel single-port
robotic system: cholecystectomy using the da Vinci Single-Site plat-
form,” Surgical Endoscopy, vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3566–3573, 2011.
[7] R. Paul, K. Pingle, J. Feldman, and A. Kay, “Instant insanity,” ﬁlm,
1971.
[8] J. Feldman, G. Feldman, G. Falk, G. Grape, J. Pearlman, I. Sobel, and
J. Tenenbaum, “The Stanford hand-eye project,” in Int. Joint Conf. on
Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 1969, pp. 521–526.
[9] P.Tournassoud,T.Lozano-P´ erez,andE.Mazer,“Regrasping,”inIEEE
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 4, 1987, pp. 1924–1928.
[10] T. Lozano-Perez, J. Jones, E. Mazer, P. O’Donnell, W. Grimson,
P. Tournassoud, and A. Lanusse, “Handey: A robot system that
recognizes, plans, and manipulates,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics
and Automation, vol. 4, 1987, pp. 843–849.
[11] M. Mason and J. Salisbury Jr, Robot Hands and the Mechanics of
Manipulation. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1985.
[12] J. Salisbury and J. Craig, “Articulated hands: Force control and
kinematic issues,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 4–17, 1982.
[13] A. Bicchi and R. Sorrentino, “Dexterous manipulation through
rolling,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 1995, pp.
452–457.
[14] L. Han, Y. Guan, Z. Li, Q. Shi, and J. Trinkle, “Dextrous manipulation
with rolling contacts,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation,
1997, pp. 992–997.
[15] M.CherifandK.Gupta,“Planningquasi-staticﬁngertipmanipulations
for reconﬁguring objects,” in IEEE T Robotic Autom, vol. 15, 1999,
pp. 837–848.
[16] R. Fearing, “Simpliﬁed grasping and manipulation with dextrous robot
hands,” IEEE Journal of Robotics and Automation, vol. 2, no. 4, pp.
188–195, 1986.
[17] J. Hong, G. Lafferriere, B. Mishra, and X. Tan, “Fine manipulation
with multiﬁnger hands,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion, 1990, pp. 1568–1573.
[18] T. Omata and K. Nagata, “Planning reorientation of an object with a
multiﬁngered hand,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation,
1994, pp. 3104–3110.
[19] L. Han and J. Trinkle, “Dextrous manipulation by rolling and ﬁnger
gaiting,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 1998, pp.
730–735.
[20] D. Rus, “In-Hand Dexterous Manipulation of Piecewise-Smooth 3-D
Objects,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 355–381, 1999.
[21] T. Schlegl and M. Buss, “Hybrid closed-loop control of robotic hand
regrasping,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 1998, pp.
3026–3031.
[22] A. Marigo and A. Bicchi, “Rolling bodies with regular surface: con-
trollability theory and applications,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control, vol. 45, no. 9, pp. 1586–1599, 2000.
[23] A. Bicchi and A. Marigo, “Dexterous grippers: Putting nonholonomy
to work for ﬁne manipulation,” in Int J Robot Res, vol. 21, 2002, pp.
427–442.
[24] L. Odhner and A. Dollar, “Dexterous manipulation with underactuated
elastic hands,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, 2011,
pp. 5254–5260.
[25] K. M. Lynch and M. T. Mason, “Stable pushing: Mechanics, control-
lability, and planning,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 533–556,
1996.
[26] M. T. Mason, “Manipulator grasping and pushing operations,” Ph.D.
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1982.
[27] ——, “Mechanics and planning of manipulator pushing operations,”
Int J Robot Res, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 53–71, 1986.
[28] M.DogarandS.Srinivasa,“Aframeworkforpush-graspinginclutter,”
in Robotics: Science and Systems VII, 2011.
[29] N. J. Nilsson, “Shakey the robot,” SRI Int, Tech. Rep. 323, 1984.
[30] K. Salisbury, “Whole arm manipulation,” in Robotics Research: The
Fourth Int Symposium, R. C. Bolles and B. Roth, Eds. Cambridge,
MA, USA: MIT Press, 1988, pp. 183–189.
[31] D. Brock, “Enhancing the dexterity of a robot hand using controlled
slip,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 1, 1988, pp.
249–251.
[32] R. Paolini, A. Rodriguez, S. S. Srinivasa, and M. T. Mason, “A
Data-Driven Statistical Framework for Post-Grasp Manipulation,” Int
J Robot Res - To appear, 2013.
[33] M. A. Erdmann and M. T. Mason, “An exploration of sensorless
manipulation,”IEEEJournalofRoboticsandAutomation,vol.4,no.4,
pp. 369–379, 1988.
[34] M. A. Erdmann, “An exploration of nonprehensile two-palm manipu-
lation,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 17, no. 5, 1998.
[35] E. Aboaf, S. Drucker, and C. Atkeson, “Task-level robot learning:
Juggling a tennis ball more accurately,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics
and Automation, 1989, pp. 1290–1295.
[36] E. W. Aboaf, C. G. Atkeson, and D. J. Reinkensmeyer, “Task-level
robot learning: Ball throwing,” Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
vol. 1006, 1987.
[37] R. Burridge, A. Rizzi, and D. Koditschek, “Toward a dynamical pick
and place,” in IEEE/RSJ Int Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
vol. 2, 1995, pp. 292–297.
[38] K.M.LynchandM.T.Mason,“Dynamicnonprehensilemanipulation:
Controllability, planning and experiments,” Int J Robot Res, vol. 18,
no. 1, pp. 64–92, 1999.
[39] K.-F. Bohringer, V. Bhatt, B. R. Donald, and K. Y. Goldberg,
“Algorithms for sensorless manipulation using a vibrating surface,”
Algorithmica, no. 3-4, pp. 389–429, 2000.
[40] T. Vose, P. Umbanhowar, and K. Lynch, “Vibration-induced frictional
force ﬁelds on a rigid plate,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and
Automation, 2007, pp. 660–667.
[41] H. Zhang, K. Tanie, and H. Maekawa, “Dextrous manipulation plan-
ning by grasp transformation,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and
Automation, 1996, pp. 3055–3060.
[42] M. T. Mason, A. Rodriguez, S. S. Srinivasa, and A. S. Vazquez,
“Autonomous Manipulation with a General-Purpose Simple Hand,”
Int J Robot Res, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 688–703, 2012.
[43] M.Cutkosky,“Ongrasp choice,graspmodels,andthedesignofhands
for manufacturing tasks,” IEEE T Robotic Autom, vol. 5, no. 3, pp.
269–279, 1989.
[44] R. C. Brost, “Automatic Grasp Planning in the Presence of Uncer-
tainty,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, vol. 3, 1986,
pp. 1575–1581.
[45] K. Y. Goldberg, “Orienting Polygonal Parts without Sensors,” Algo-
rithmica, vol. 10, no. 204, pp. 201–225, 1993.
[46] R. P. Paul, “Modeling, trajectory calculation and servoing of a
computer controlled arm.” Stanford Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory,
Technical Report AIM– 177, 1972.
[47] T. Lozano-P´ erez, J. Jones, P. O’Donnell, and E. Mazer, Handey: a
robot task planner. MIT Press Cambridge, MA, USA, 1992.
[48] T. Senoo, Y. Yamakawa, S. Mizusawa, A. Namiki, M. Ishikawa, and
M. Shimojo, “Skillful manipulation based on high-speed sensory-
motor fusion,” in IEEE Int Conf. on Robotics and Automation, May
2009, pp. 1611–1612.
[49] E.Berkson,R.Aylward,J.Zachazewski,J.Paradiso,andT.Gill,“IMU
arrays: The biomechanics of baseball pitching,” Orthopaedic Journal
at Harvard Medical School, 2006.
1585
