A Probabilistic Approach to Learn Activities of Daily Living of a
Mobility Aid Device User
Mitesh Patel, Jaime Valls Miro and Gamini Dissanayake
Abstract— The problem of inferring human behaviour is
naturally complex: people interact with the environment and
each other in many different ways, and dealing with the often
incomplete and uncertain sensed data by which the actions are
perceived only compounds the difﬁculty of the problem. In this
paper, we propose a framework whereby these elaborate be-
haviours can be naturally simpliﬁed by decomposing them into
smaller activities, whose temporal dependencies can be more
efﬁciently represented via probabilistic hierarchical learning
models. In this regard, patterns of a number of activities typi-
cally carried out by users of an ambulatory aid device have been
identiﬁed with the aid of a Hierarchical Hidden Markov Model
(HHMM) framework. By decomposing the complex behaviours
into multiple layers of abstraction the approach is shown
capable of modelling and learning these tightly coupled human-
machine interactions. The inference accuracy of the proposed
model is proven to compare favourably against more traditional
discriminative models, as well as other compatible generative
strategies to provide a complete picture that highlights the
beneﬁts of the proposed approach, and opens the door to more
intelligent assistance with a robotic mobility aid.
I. INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION
Automated assistive devices like guiding canes [1], robotic
wheelchairs [2], walkers [3] [4] and manipulators [5] are
all designed to make life of elderly and disabled peo-
ple more comfortable by helping them in their everyday
activities, enabling them to live more independently and
ultimately improving their overall quality of life. With a
marked demographic shift at a global level indicating that
the worldwide proportion of people aged 60 and over is
expected to double between 2000 and 2050 [6], providing the
elderly and frail with assistive devices that can enhance their
mobility needs in particular has been a strong motivation
for researchers to develop more advanced technological aids
through alternative or augmentative aid devices [7].
The concept of independence living speciﬁcally for the
disabled population has been further promoted by the United
Nations under the banner of ‘Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities (CRPD)’ which states that support-
ing services provided to individuals with a disability should
be such that it enables them to be integrated within the
community, and not in a segregated settings [8].
With growing advances in low cost sensing devices and
computing platforms, it is becoming increasingly viable to
advance the development of more intelligent assistive devices
able to apply practical aid responsive to the needs of humans
M. Patel, J. V . Miro and G. Dissanayake are with Faculty of
Engineering and IT, University of Technology Sydney (UTS), NSW
2007, Australia. (mitesh.k.patel@student.uts.edu.au,
(jaime.vallsmiro,gamini.dissanayake)@uts.edu.au)
as a tightly knit human-robot interactive system. However,
a fundamental challenge in closing the gap between human
interactions with machines is the inadequate capability of
the devices to become aware of the complex behaviours
performed by humans, which is exacerbated by the inherent
limitations in the physical sensors used [9]. There has been
growing interest in expressing complex behaviours as a com-
bination of meaningful sub-parts referred to as Action Primi-
tives (APs) [10]. Research done on human motion and other
biological movements postulates that movement behaviour
consists of simple APs, atomic movements that can be
combined and sequenced to form complex behaviours [11].
For example, the task of going from a bedroom to the kitchen
using a walker can be further decomposed (in reference to
a typical house plan, shown as a 2D ﬂoor plan in Fig. 2(b))
into: “recall walker) stand up) get out of bedroom) go
straight) turn right) go straight) enter kitchen) sit
down) indicate walker to go away”. Arguments raised in
the ﬁeld of neuroscience [12] reinforces the idea that human
actions are composed of APs similar to human speech, where
utterances of words are broken down into phonemes. Along
the advantage of a top-down approach, where complex tasks
can be decomposed into atomic APs, this also enables a
bottom-up approach whereby APs can be reused to construct
different task sequences.
II. PROPOSITION
In [9] the authors proposed a solution to model the
interactions between an intelligent mobility aid and their
human operator. Navigational activities were modelled by
decomposing them into primitive actions based on junctions
and segments made available through a topological repre-
sentation of the environment. The bottleneck in modelling
ADLs with that approach was the need of generating a
map prior to encoding the ADL activities. In this paper
we present an alternative proposal in which activities are
decomposed into a dictionary of APs based on intrinsic
human motion behaviours, as perceived by the low level
sensors ﬁtted on the mobility device (e.g. “go straight”. or
“turn left” for the case of the ambulatory assistive device
using in this work to demonstrate the proposed framework).
This generic representation of APs appears to capture human-
centered robot interactions more efﬁciently by allowing us to
compute activity estimates without the need to resort to prior
navigational maps, while still achieving as good inference
accuracies (99.93% vs 98.15% with mapping AP encodings).
The proposed probabilistic model is a Hierarchical Hidden
Markov Model (HHMM), a stochastic framework operating
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 969
at various levels of abstraction, hence naturally able to
decompose complex ADLs into simpler APs. The building
blocks that form the dictionary of APs act to describe the
set of activities the user performs - with the aid of an
instrumented walking device in this work. Given the multi-
level decomposition of ADLs into APs, it will be shown how
the HHMM framework can learn ADLs which are both static
(activities performed at a single place, such as standing up)
and navigational (moving to a speciﬁc location of interest,
e.g. to kitchen) in nature.
To further validate the framework and demonstrate its
effectiveness, data related to motion patterns and other com-
patible assistive behaviours was collected from a group of
healthy volunteers while using a powered rollator walker, and
results compared with standard discriminative and generative
models.
III. RELATED WORK
There are signiﬁcant challenges when modelling human
behaviours in a deterministic manner, most notably the intrin-
sic uncertainty present when users perform an activity, and
the inherent noise embedded in the sensor information gath-
ered to provide cues about the behaviours. Researchers have
therefore resorted to explore different stochastic/probabilistic
modelling techniques capable of representing the possi-
ble uncertainties involved in ADLs. Probabilistic models
such as Bayesian Network (BN) [13], Dynamic Bayesian
Network (DBN) [14],Partially Observable Markov Decision
Process(POMDPs) [15], [16], [17], Hidden Markov Mod-
els (HMM) [18] and Hierarchical Hidden Markov Models
(HHMM) [19] have been proposed in the literature.
Hoey et. al. [17] for instance used a POMDP for comput-
ing policies and action to estimate and adapt to user states,
such as awareness, responsiveness and overall dementia
level. An HHM and Conditional Random Fields (CRFs) tech-
nique was utilised by Omar et. al. [20] to recognise activities
of passive rollator walker user. The activities modelled were
related to basic activities such as: stop/standing, walking
forward, turn left, turn right, not touching the walker and
transfers from sit to stand and vice versa. A Hierarchical
Semi-Markov Model (HSMM) was proposed by Glover et.
al. [3] to learn users’ high level activities which were based
on the topological location of the user and the most likely
activity a user could perform at the respective location.
The HSMM framework operated at three different levels:
at the lowest level the metric motion is described by metric
coordinates, at the mid-level the framework uses topological
regions as its element and at the highest level the person’s ac-
tivities are divided into logically broader activities. Hirata et.
al. [21] proposed a motion control algorithm to estimate user
states of a passive walker user. The algorithm recognised
three user states such as: walking, stopping and emergency
falling. The user states were inferred based on the distance
between the user and the walker and the velocity of the
walker.
HHMMs have been proposed in several application areas.
Nguyen et. al. [19] used an HHMM framework to model
and recognise three human activities (e.g. having a meal) in
a conﬁned space, while tracking the user with two static cam-
eras. The semantics embedded in the activities were tightly
coupled to the locations where the relevant objects of interest
- such as fridge, cupboard etc. - were located, not the actual
interactions between user and objects. Grasping and object
manipulation activities have also been studied with RGB-D
cameras within the context of HHMM frameworks [22] in
small 3D working envelopes. A framework based on an H-
DBN was able to infer user’s mode of transportation and
desired destination [23] in an urban setting, and guidance
cues where proposed when it was felt the user was deviating
from his normal activities.
In user activity models related to robotic walker platforms
(e.g. [20], [3], [21]), propositions have been mostly aimed
at predicting either the fundamental user activities broadly
aligned with what we categorise in our work as APs, or
more abstract long term activities (as in the case of Glover et.
al. [3]). In the approach suggested in this work, an HHMM-
based model is used not only to infer APs, but also exploits
these APs in a more sophisticated hierarchical structure
to construct and identify overall activities of daily living
(e.g. navigating to a location of interest) by probabilistically
combining them into sequences of abstract human motion
behaviours. The authors believe that such approach provides
a natural framework to map continuous human-machine
interaction behaviours, as those present when operating a
typical walker frame, thus allowing more intelligent assis-
tance with robotic mobility aids based on user intentions,
ultimately the objective of this research.
IV. HIERARCHICAL HIDDEN MARKOV MODEL
(HHMM)
Hierarchical Hidden Markov Model (HHMM) generalises
the standard Hidden Markov Models (HMM), by allowing
hidden states to represent stochastic process themselves. HH-
MMs have become a popular tool for modelling real world
data which has non-linear variations and hierarchical struc-
ture [24]. In HHMMs the state can either emit a single obser-
vation or string of observations. Single observations states are
called “production state” whereas states that emit string of
observations are called “abstract states” [25]. The high-level
(“abstract states”) emit a string of observations which are
governed by sub-HMMs which are further recursively called
till it emits a single (“production”) state [25]. On execution
of the sub-HHM, control is returned to wherever it was called
from [25]. The hierarchical structure makes the HHMM
capable of disintegrating a given problem at different levels
of hierarchy thereby facilitating exploration (modelling long
term activities) and exploitation (modelling action primitives)
within the same framework. In the paradigm of modelling
ADLs from action primitives (APs), the high level activities
call a more reﬁned string of low-level activities which in
turn calls low level activities. This process continues till the
most primitive activity state is executed. On termination of
lower level activities, the parent behaviour may terminate or
change state depending on its destination states.
970
(a) HHMM model (b) Layered Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) model (c) Support Vector Machine (SVM) classiﬁer
Fig. 1. (a) A 2-level HHMM model represented using a Hierarchical-DBN. The hierarchy of the framework demarcated by horizontal dashed lines.
(b) 2-layer DBN Model in which layer 1 predicts the APs whereas layer 2 used the predicted APs and LOC information to infer long term tasks. (c)
Discriminate SVM classiﬁer for predicting APs and long term tasks.
A Hierarchical Dynamic Bayesian Network (H-DBN) rep-
resentation of the HHMM framework is shown in Fig. 1(a).
The H-DBN structure consists of three types of nodes,
Q
d
t
;O
t
;F
d
t
where d deﬁnes the hierarchical depth of the
framework (d = 2 in our case). The edges connecting each
nodes deﬁnes the dependencies between the states repre-
sented by each node.
Node Q
d
t
symbolises the hidden state at each level d and
time instance t. It is important to note that at a given time
instance, hidden nodes at all the levels will be represented
probabilistically by a state belief. The observation node
O
t
provides information related to the user/environment to
the hidden nodes of the framework. Based on the type of
observation they can be modelled as discrete P(Q
d
t
jO
t
) or
mixture of Gaussian (m;S) nodes. Lastly, node F
d
t
represents
the terminating state of the sub-HMM so that the control can
returned to the high level parent node/state.
Given the parameters (Q
d
t
;O
t
;F
d
t
), the H-DBN deﬁnes the
joint probability distribution over the set of variables that
represents the evolution of the stochastic process over time.
The state distribution are deﬁned in the form of prior prob-
abilities (p
d
1
), transition probabilities (A(i; j)
d
t
), observation
probabilities (O
t
) and termination probabilities (A(i;end)).
A. Prior Probabilities
The prior probabilities provide information related to the
most likely initial user state. The probabilities at level 1 and
2 are deﬁned as
P(Q
2
1
)=p
2
( j)
P(Q
1
1
)=p
1
k
( j);
(1)
where p
2
represent the initial probabilities at level 2 and p
1
k
at level 1, provided level 2 is in state k.
B. Transition Probabilities
The transition probabilities of an HHMM framework
represent the most likely state of the system, represented
using a conditional probability table or density (CPT). The
probability distribution at level 2 is conditioned on the
previous state at the same level, and the termination state
at time t  1. The Probabilities at level 2 are deﬁned as
P(Q
2
t
= jjQ
2
t 1
= i;F
2
t 1
= f)=

A
2
(i; j) if F
2
t 1
= 0
p
2
( j) if F
2
t 1
= 1:
(2)
Similarly, the conditional probabilities at level 1 (Fig. 1(a))
at time t has its dependencies on the state at level 2 at time
t, the previous state at level 1, and the termination state at
time t 1. The CPTs at the intermediate level are deﬁned by
P(Q
1
t
= jjQ
1
t 1
= i;F
2
t 1
= f;Q
2
t
= k)=

A
1
k
(i; j) if F
2
t 1
= 0
p
1
k
( j) if F
2
t 1
= 1:
(3)
In (2), A
2
represents the transition probabilities from state
i to j. Similarly, in (3), the transition probability at level 1
given level 2 is in state k is captured in A
1
k
.
C. Termination Probabilities
The termination state F has its dependencies on the hidden
states at level 1 and level 2 at time step t. CPTs of the
termination state is deﬁned by
P(F
2
t
= 1jQ
2
t
= k;Q
1
t
= i)= A
2
k
(i;end): (4)
D. Observation Probabilities
The observation probabilities are conditioned on the hid-
den state provided a speciﬁc observation is observed. The
observation probabilities for discrete and observed nodes is
given by
P(O
t
jQ
1
t
= i)= N(m
i
;S
i
)
P(O
t
jQ
1
t
= i)= C(i):
(5)
E. Learning and Inference
The HHMM framework can be learned using both su-
pervised and unsupervised learning techniques. For unsu-
pervised learning, Expectation Maximisation (EM) [26] is
probably the most widely used learning technique. It is a gen-
eral iterative technique for performing maximum likelihood
estimation of parameters which consists of missing data.
It is generally rather difﬁcult to obtain labelled data when
971
TABLE I
USERS’ EVERYDAY ACTIVITIES
User Task Abbrev. Description
Recall Walker RW Recalling walker to use it
Walker Go Away WGA Instruction the walker to go way so that it is not an hindrance
Stand Up SU Stand up using the support of the walker
Sit Down SD Sit down using the support of the walker
to Bedroom BED Navigating to the bedroom
to Kitchen KIT Navigating to the kitchen
to Bathroom BAT Navigating to the bathroom
to Laundry LAU Navigating to the laundry
to Medical MED Navigating to the medical
Navigating in Room GAN Navigating locally in a room
dealing with realistic scenarios, thus an unsupervised mode
of learning is preferable. In our work the model was therefore
learnt with EM, and a maximum likelihood estimator was
then employed to infer the activities.
V. PROBLEM SPECIFIC HHMM FRAMEWORK
Everyday user activities in our experimental set-up were
organised as per those in Table I. The tasks are a combination
of static activities generally associated to being performed at
a single location (e.g Stand Up), and goal-oriented naviga-
tional tasks (e.g Going to Kitchen) which involve visiting
different location of interest. Static activities being already
in their most primitive state cannot be decomposed further,
hence such ADLs are also regarded as independent APs in
themselves. On the other hand, goal-oriented activities need
to be further decomposed into more basic navigational com-
ponents, which in this work are proposed to be in the form
of relative human motion behaviours (e.g Turn Left) to avoid
the bottleneck of encoding absolute navigational information
from a map, and the increased AP dimensionality that comes
with it (10 vs 17 with the map-based AP strategy). The
overall number of APs in which the tasks have been clustered
are listed in Table II.
A typical scenario could be illustrated by considering for
instance the activities involved in going to the kitchen from
the bedroom (shown in light blue in Fig. 2(b)). The sequence
of tasks can be decomposed as “Recall Walker ) Stand
Up) Navigate in Room (until out onto the corridor))
To Kitchen [Go Straight Southwards) Turn Right) Go
Straight Westwards (until entering kitchen)]) Navigate in
Room) Sit Down) Walker Go Away”.
The HHMM model used to evaluate our proposition is
shown in Fig. 1(a). In this case, user activities are layered
in two abstraction levels wherein APs are predicted at the
intermediate level (level 1), and ADLs are inferred at the
higher level. As in our previous work, the observation nodes
of the framework are a combination of both the sensors
installed on the walker, and location information attained
from a localisation module:
 The readings from the physical sensors of the walker
(LSG,RSG) and orientation (q) information are condi-
tioned as Gaussian nodes.
 Two discrete nodes, a location of interest (LOC) ob-
tained from the (x;y) location of the user and walker,
and an RF node corresponding to an RF switch used to
recall the walker or to indicate it to go away.
TABLE II
ACTION PRIMITIVES
Action Primitive Abbrev. Description
Recall Walker RW Recalling walker to use it
Walker Go Away WGA Instruction the walker to go way so that it is not an hindrance
Stand Up SU Stand up using the support of the walker
Sit Down SD Sit down using the support of the walker
Go Straight Northwards GSN Going straight with orientation towards north
Go Straight Westwards GSW Going straight with orientation towards west
Go Straight Eastwards GSE Going straight with orientation towards east
Go Straight Southwards GSS Going straight with orientation towards south
Turn Left TL Turning left
Turn Right TR Turning right
Our ofﬁce space was divided into different location of
interest so as to resemble a typical home setting. User would
then visit some of these many locations while performing
their different everyday activities with the aid of the assistive
walker, as described in the next Section.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS & DISCUSSION
Off-line testing of the HHMM framework was done using
real time data collected from a set of users while they
performed different activities using an instrumented walker
platform
A. Power Walker for Data Acquisition
The power walker used for data collection is a modiﬁed
version of a commercially available walking frame with four
wheels shown in Fig 2(a). Two 24Volts (DC) reversible gear-
head motors, along with incremental optical encoders were
ﬁtted to the rear wheels of the walker (front wheels were pas-
sive). Two set of strain gauges (SGs) bridges were mounted
on each handle bar. The differential force measured on the
vertical axis on each handle-bar was used as an indicative
measure of the users’ intention to start an activity (e.g. user
trying to stand up). The platform was also instrumented
with a radio switch, used to instruct the walker to go to
a parking position, or come back to the last location where
the user sent the walker away. This feature is beneﬁcial in
places where the user performs activities that do not required
walker support (e.g. while sitting watching TV). A micro-
controller at the lower level was used to communicate with
the sensor hardware and a high performance computer was
also installed on the walker for data processing.
Given the nature of the work, and the sensitivity of
undertaking trials with aged/frail subjects, healthy volunteers
(25-31 years of age) were asked to participate in a set of
experiments. The volunteers were briefed on the working
of the platform and given sufﬁcient time to understand
the functionality and practice using the walker. During the
experiments, the powered walker was conﬁgured to simply
provide steering assistance based on data sensed from the
handle gauges, i.e. no further active navigational support was
provided.
A key criteria to provide active assistance to walker
users in their everyday activities is of course to acquire
knowledge about their activity patterns. Typically, walker
users have a known set of target locations such as bathroom,
kitchen, living room etc, that they visit while performing
different daily activities. Identifying locations of interest
is not straightforward and there is no general method to
972
(a) Intrumented rollator walker (b) Set of ADLs performed by one of the users in the testing environment
Fig. 2. (a) The instrumented power rollator walker used for data collection. (b) Top view of the testing environment, divided into different typical locations
of interest in a home setting, where walker user ADLs are superimposed in different colour depending on the routine.
achieve this, as it is a user and environment speciﬁc problem.
These patterns are normally deﬁned by occupational therapist
while users’ activities are monitored under clinical tests
conditions [27]. In this work, however, we predeﬁned the
activities encountered by a walker user. 5 different locations
of interest generally reﬂective of a home environment were
set and data from the sensors collected while user visited
those as they wished . An example of a trajectory plot from
one of the users is shown in Fig. 2(b). Data was logged at a
sampling rate of 0.5 Hz using the Player/Stage open source
toolbox [28].
B. Methodology
The proposed HHMM framework to learn and infer user
activities was evaluated using the BNT toolbox [25]. Col-
lected data was divided into two equal sets for training
and testing purposes. To further cross validate the inference
accuracy the data was manually labelled. The ADLs were
inferred at a higher level (level 2), with an accuracy of
99% whereas the APs were inferred with an accuracy of
88% at the intermediate level using the HHMM framework
(see Tables III and IV respectively). Overall accuracy is
only marginally better than in our previous work (98.15%),
yet the network was able to achieve this high inference of
behavioural accuracy without the need to resort to absolute
topological information from the map in their APs, a signiﬁ-
cantly more computationally efﬁcient strategy in generalising
the hierarchical network to broader domains.
C. Discussion
To further validate the inference capabilities of our pro-
posed scheme, we also compared the results against two
of the main approaches used in human activity recognition.
DBN is probably the most common and better suited, yet a
ﬂat network would be an unfair comparison, and for this
work the layered DBN shown in Fig. 1(b) was used. In
this model, layer 1 infers the APs, whereas layer 2 uses the
localisation information and the APs inferred by layer 1 to
predict the long term tasks. As seen in Tables III and IV,
the inference accuracies of the APs were necessarily very
similar to those attained with the HHMM framework, yet
drastically reduced for ADLs. This further reinforces the
capability of the hierarchical framework, which exploits the
spatio-temporal nature of ADLs. The results of an HHMM
framework were also compared with a common discrimi-
native classiﬁer such as SVM. Once again, to make a fair
comparison, two separate SVMs were used to predict the APs
and ADLs, as depicted by Fig. 1(c). The APs are predicted
by SV M
1
, which were then used as inputs to the SV M
2
classiﬁer, along with localisation information, to infer ADLs.
Since SVMs learning is supervised, classiﬁcation accuracy
of APs was necessarily higher, in the order of 96%, as the
atomic classes are more easily differentiable, yet the temporal
constraints in the ADL classiﬁcation cannot be so easily
encapsulated by maximum margin approaches such as SVM,
and accuracies around 76% were attained.
VII. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK
Robotic systems are bound to acquire more sophisticated
assistive capabilities if they are to operate in unstructured,
dynamic, human-centred environments, responsive to the
needs of interacting with humans. Within that context, aware-
ness of human intentions play a key role to be able to apply
any practical assistive action where a user interacts with
a robot to carry out their regular daily activities, be that
navigational, manipulative, communicative, or others. This
work postulates a cognitive system that exploits hierarchical
structures within temporal models to infer user behaviours
while carrying out a set of interacting activities. A speciﬁc
example of ADLs framed within the context of an ambulatory
robot aimed at providing assistance to users with mobility
deﬁciencies has been studied. The alternative proposition in
this work of encoding intrinsic human motion behaviours has
been shown to outperform an earlier suggestion that used
topological information to form the chain of APs, while at
the same time being computationally more effective as the
dimensionality of the APs is also reduced. Real data collected
from (able) users of an intelligent robotic rollator walker has
been used to evaluate the proposed work. The framework has
been shown capable of predicting APs and recognise long
term user intentions generated by combining APs in varying
sequential orders. The proposed HHMM model inferred APs
with an accuracy of 88%, but rather signiﬁcantly ADLs
were predicted with an accuracy of 99% (marginally better
than the 98.15% achieved with mapping AP encodings). For
validation purposes, the HHMM model was also compared
973
TABLE III
ACCURACY OF ADLS INFERRED BY GENERATIVE AND DISCRIMINATIVE MODELS (%)
Model / ADL BED KIT BAT MED LAU RW WGA SU SD GAN Overall
HHMM 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 97.22 100.00 99.93
DBN 16.00 56.00 89.00 57.00 62.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 67.58
SVM 41.69 0.00 59.76 93.71 93.81 100.00 99.09 98.31 100.00 100.00 76.47
TABLE IV
APS INFERENCE ACCURACY BY GENERATIVE AND DISCRIMINATIVE MODELS (%)
Model / AP RW WGA SU SD TL TR GSS GSW GSN GSE Overall
HHMM 100.00 100.00 100.00 97.22 77.01 51.93 95.90 92.49 90.92 80.70 88.05
DBN 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 52.38 35.21 96.04 94.40 92.05 86.59 87.79
SVM 100.00 99.09 98.31 100.00 82.89 64.38 98.67 100.00 98.40 97.66 96.09
with two common comparable techniques, a layered DBN
and two sequential SVMs. All three techniques predicted
APs with reasonable accuracies, yet the inference of ADLs
reduced substantially for the layered DBN and 2 stage SVM
models, which substantiates the relevant role of temporal
relations in predicting complex ADLs. This work is currently
focused on incorporating an online learning algorithm within
the HHMM framework, such as online-EM, so that the
model can adapt to changes in user behaviours, and/or daily
patterns, both of which are likely to occur with time.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Dubowsky, F. G´ enot, S. Godding, H. Kozono, A. Skwersky, H. Yu,
and L. S. Yu, “PAMM - A robotic aid to the elderly for mobility
assistance and monitoring: A helping-hand for the elderly,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2000, pp. 570
– 576.
[2] T. Carlson and Y . Demiris, “Increasing robotic wheelchair safety with
collaborative control: Evidence from secondary task experiments,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2010,
pp. 5582 – 5587.
[3] J. Glover, S. Thrun, and J. T. Matthews, “Learning user models of
mobility-related activities through instrumented walking aids,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2004, pp. 3306
– 3312.
[4] G. Wasson, P. Sheth, C. Huang, and M. Alwan, “Intelligent mobility
aids for the elderly,” in Eldercare Technology for Clinical Practition-
ers, M. Alwan and R. A. Felder, Eds. Humana Press, 2008, pp. 53
– 76.
[5] S. Srinivasa, D. Ferguson, M. Vandeweghe, R. Diankov, D. Berenson,
C. Helfrich, and H. Strasdat, “The robotic busboy: Steps towards de-
veloping a mobile robotic home assistant,” in International Conference
on Intelligent Autonomous Systems, 2008, pp. 129–136.
[6] United Nations, “United nations 2006 world populations prospects:
The 2006 revision,” United Nations, New York, Tech. Rep., 2006.
[7] M. M. Martins, C. P. Santos, A. Frizera-Neto, and R. Ceres, “Assistive
mobility devices focusing on smart walkers: Classiﬁcation and review,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 548–562, 2012.
[8] A. Ofﬁcer and A. Posarac, World Report on Disability. World Health
Organisation, 2011.
[9] M. Patel, J. V . Mir´ o, and G. Dissanayake, “A hierarchical hidden
markov model to support activities of daily living with an assistive
robotic walker,” in 4th IEEE/RAS EMBS International Conference on
Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics, 2012, pp. 1071 – 1076.
[10] V . Kr¨ uger, D. Herzog, S. Baby, A. Ude, and D. Kragic, “Learning
actions from observations,” IEEE Robotics & Automatation Magazine,
vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 30 – 43, 2010.
[11] D. Kulic, D. Kragic, and V . Kr¨ uger, “Learning action primitives,” in
Visual Analysis of Humans, 2011, pp. 333 – 353.
[12] G. Rizzolatti, L. Foggassi, and V . Gallese, “Neurophysiological mech-
anisms underlying the understanding and imitation of action,” Nature
Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 2, pp. 661 – 670, 2001.
[13] J. H. Hong, Y . S. Song, and S. B. Cho, “A hierarchical bayesian
network for mixed-initiative human-robot interaction,” in IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2005, pp. 3808 –
3813.
[14] K. A. Tahboub, “Intelligent human-machine interaction based on dy-
namic bayesian networks probabilistic intention recognition,” Journal
of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 31 – 52, 2006.
[15] J. V . Mir´ o, V . Osswald, M. Patel, and G. Dissanayake, “Robotic
assistance with attitude: A mobility agent for motor function reha-
bilitation and ambulation support,” in IEEE International Conference
on Rehabilitation Robotics, 2009, pp. 529 – 534.
[16] T. Taha, J. V . Mir´ o, and G. Dissanayake, “Pomdp-based long-term user
intention prediction for wheelchair navigation,” in IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2008, pp. 3920 – 3925.
[17] J. Hoey, A. V . Bertoldi, P. Poupart, and A. Mihailidis, “Assisitng per-
sons with dementia during handwashing using a partially observable
markov decision process,” in the International Conference on Vision
Systems, March 2007.
[18] C. Zhu, Q. Cheng, and W. Sheng, “Human intention recognition
in smart assisted living systems using a hierarchical hidden markov
model,” in IEEE International Conference on Automation Science and
Engineering, 2008, pp. 253 – 258.
[19] N. Nguyen, D. Phung, S. Venkatesh, and H. Bui, “Learning and
detecting activities from movement trajectories using the hierarchical
hidden markov model,” in IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, vol. 2, 2005, pp. 955 –
960.
[20] F. Omar, M. Sinn, J. Truszkowski, P. Poupart, J. Tung, and A. Caine,
“Comparative analysis of probabilistic models for activity recognition
with an instrumented walker,” in the 26th Conference on Uncertainty
in Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2010, pp. 1 – 9.
[21] Y . Hirata, A. Muraki, and K. Kosuge, “Motion control of intelligent
passive-type walker for fall-prevention function based on estimation
of user state,” in IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, 2006, pp. 3498 – 3503.
[22] M. Patel, C. H. Ek, N. Kyriazis, A. Argyros, J. V . Miro, and D. Kragic,
“Language for learning complex human-object interactions,” in IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2013, pp. 4982
– 4987.
[23] L. Liao, “Location-based activity recognition,” Ph.D. dissertation,
University of Washington, 2006.
[24] S. Fine, Y . Singer, and N. Tishby, “The hierarchical hidden markov
model: Analysis and applications,” Machine Learning, vol. 32, pp. 41
– 62, 1998.
[25] K. P. Murphy, “Dynamic bayesian networks: Representation, inference
and learning,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Califronia, Berkeley,
2002.
[26] A. P. Dempster, N. M. Laird, and D. B. Rubin, “Maximum likeli-
hood from incomplete data via the em algorithm,” Journal of Royal
Statistical Society, Series B, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 1–38, 1977.
[27] O. T. Practice, “Occupational therapy practice framework : Domain
& process (2nd edition),” The American Journal of Occupational
Therapy, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 625–683, 2008.
[28] B. Gerkey, R. Vaughan, and A. Howard, “The player/stage project:
Tools for multi-robot and distributed sensor systems,” in The 11th
IEEE International Conference on Advanced Robotics, 2003, pp. 317
– 323.
974
