  
 
? 
Abstract—Microfluidic devices provide efficient approaches 
for building cellular tubular structures for in vitro tissue models 
in tissue engineering. In this paper, we report a novel method of 
constructing three-dimensional (3D) multilayered tubular 
structures based on axis translation of two-dimensionally (2D) 
microstructures inside microfluidic devices. The on-chip 
fabrication of movable 2D microstructures embedding 
fibroblasts (NIH/3T3) based on Poly (ethylene glycol) Diacrylate 
(PEGDA) was reported. Novel two-layered microfluidic devices 
were fabricated by Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), for 
conducting the fluidic self-assembly of the 2D microstructures. 
The self-assembly process was experimentally demonstrated. 
For improving the assembly results, a funneled structure and 3 
micro grooves were added inside the microfluidic channel. 
Improved self-assembly result of constructing a multilayered 
tubular microstructure with higher efficiency was 
demonstrated. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
ecently the construction of three-dimensional (3D) cell 
structures is one of the major challenges in tissue 
engineering, since it can provide effective approaches of 
constructing implantable in vitro artificial tissues [1, 2]. The 
cells inside real tissues and organs are arranged according to 
certain shapes, such as neural cells with line shape, skin with 
reticular shape and blood vessel with tube shape [3]. For 
building artificial tissues, important issues are how to 
immobilize cells inside certain structures for encapsulation 
and how to assemble these structures to form different shapes 
as cell scaffolds [4, 5]. Moreover, long-term co-culture of 
these immobilized and assembled cells is the key way to 
construct functional artificial tissues [6]. 
For cell immobilization, approaches such as aspiration, 
pressure of solution and fluidic structure are used [7]. The 
aspiration and pressure have the advantages of the large 
fixing force, while the disadvantage is cell damaging [8]. 
Cells are immobilized inside special microfluidic device. The 
immobilized cells are difficult to be further analysis [9]. 
On-chip fabrication based on photo-crosslinkable resin via 
UV illumination is a creative way for immobilizing cells [10]. 
 
Tao Yue, Masahiro Nakajima, Masaru Takeuchi and Toshio Fukuda are with 
Department of Micro-Nano Systems Engineering, Nagoya University, 
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8603 JAPAN 
 ( e-mail: yue@robo.mein.nagoya-u.ac.jp)  
Qiang Huang and Toshio Fukuda are with School of Mechatronical 
Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, 5 South Zhongguancun Street, 
Haidian District, Beijing, 100081 CHINA 
Toshio Fukuda is with the Faculty of Science and Engineering, Meijo 
University, 1-501, Shiogamaguchi, Tenpaku-ku, Nagoya, 468-8502, JAPAN 
In our previous works, cells which were patterned inside the 
microfluidic channel were directly immobilized, maintaining 
their patterns. Several advantages such as high-speed, 
low-cost and arbitrary shaped are with the on-chip fabrication 
method [11]. 
There are several methods for assembling 3D cell 
structures. Scaffolds are used for supporting cells to generate 
complex and arbitrary 3D structures [12]. However, the small 
vascular-like networks are difficult to be generated. 
Constructing 3D structures after cell encapsulation is a good 
way for building 3D cell structures. Hydrogel fiber 
embedding several kinds of cells and co-culture of them is 
demonstrated [13]. Shape of these hydrogels is difficult to 
control. Cell embedded microstructures are used as 
components for constructing larger 3D cell structures as a 
bottom-up approach [14]. Approaches of assembling these 
cell embedded microstructures include direct manipulation 
and fluidic assembly [15]. 
In our previous work, a dielectrophoretic microfluidic 
device was developed and two-dimensional (2D) 
microstructures embedding controllable particles were 
fabricated on-chip [16]. Based on these 2D microstructures, 
some preliminary experiments of constructing 3D 
multilayered structures were conducted inside microfluidic 
channels. However, there were many limitations in our 
previous methods [17]. 
Self-assembly is a suitable approach for high-throughput 
assembly of these microstructures, because of its automatic 
process and short operating time [18]. Self-assembly method 
is applied in many researches. 3D structures can be assembled 
by air [19]. Furthermore, inside microfluidic device, 
self-assembly based on fluidic dynamics provides good 
methods for constructing 3D structures [20]. Different 3D 
Fluidic Self-assembly of Multilayered Tubular Microstructures by Axis 
Translation inside Two-layered Microfluidic Devices 
Tao YUE, Student member, IEEE, Masahiro NAKAJIMA, Member, IEEE, Masaru TAKEUCHI,  
Member, IEEE, Qiang HUANG Member, IEEE,and Toshio FUKUDA, Fellow, IEEE 
Fig.1 A schematic drawing of the fabrication and assembly method 
R 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5836
  
microstructures are self-assembled based on functional 
channel structures, which shows great potential to be used in 
large amount cell assembly [21]. 
In this paper, we developed a novel method of constructing 
3D multilayered tubular structures based on 2D 
microstructures inside two-layered microfluidic devices, 
aiming for applying in building engineered vascular-like 
tubular structures in the future. The whole research procedure 
is shown in Fig. 1. Compare with the previous assembly 
method [17], the axis translation of 2D microstructures was 
achieved, and the assembly with higher efficiency and longer 
tubular structures were experimentally demonstrated. 
The on-chip fabrication of movable 2D microstructures 
embedding fibroblasts (NIH/3T3) based on Poly (ethylene 
glycol) Diacrylate (PEGDA) was reported. PEGDA has low 
toxicity. Cell viability is confirmed inside several kinds of 
PEGDAs such as molecular weight with 700 and 3400 [22]. 
Novel two-layered microfluidic channels with a micro well 
and micro grooves were presented for conducting fluidic 
self-assembly. The two-layered microfluidic devices were 
fabricated by Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS). The axis 
translation of 2D microstructures inside the micro well and 
the fluidic self-assembly process were demonstrated. For 
improving the assembly results, the funneled structure and 3 
micro grooves were added in the microfluidic channels. 
Improved self-assembly result of constructing multilayered 
tubular microstructures with higher efficiency was 
demonstrated. 
 
 
II. ON-CHIP FABRICATION OF MOVABLE MICROSTRUCTURES 
EMBEDDING CELLS 
A. On-chip fabrication method 
The on-chip fabrication method for arbitrary-shaped 
microstructures is shown in upper left part of Fig. 1. Optical 
microscope (IX-71, Olympus) was used for observing 
samples and exposing UV on samples. X-Y stage and height 
of the objective lens (Z-axis) were controlled for adjusting 
fabrication positions. PET (polyethylene terephthalate) 
masks were set between UV lamp and objective lens for 
patterning UV light. Several objective lens were used, 
including oil immersion objective UPLFLN 100XOI2, 60X 
and 40X (Olympus). UV was illuminated by the mercury 
lamp (USH-103tems) and controlled by the shutter 
(BSH-RIX, Sigmakoki). The microfluidic device was set on 
the X-Y stage.  
The patterns on the PET mask are able to be 
arbitrary-shaped, depending on the designs. UV was 
illuminated through the mask from bottom of the objective 
lens into the PEGDA (molecular weight 200, 700, Sigma 
Aldrich). UV was patterned by the masks. Then the PEGDA 
was polymerized and the arbitrary shapes of microstructures 
were fabricated inside the solution [11]. The position of the 
microstructure is confirmed by the stage. Microstructures 
were fabricated by illuminating the UV-ray for 0.2 second via 
the objective lens of 100X and 40X. By different masks, we 
could easily fabricate different microstructures with large 
amount in short time. Furthermore, by programming control 
software for UV lump shutter and stage of microscope, it is 
possible to conduct the automatic on-chip fabrication. 
During the fabrication, when the surface of substrate is 
glass, the fabricated microstructure adheres on the glass 
surface. When the surface of substrate is PDMS, the 
fabricated microstructure is able to move in the 
non-polymerized resin freely [10]. Therefore, a PDMS 
(SILPOT 184 W/C, Dow Corning Toray) surrounded 
microfluidic channel was prepared for fabricating movable 
microstructures. 
 
B. Movable 2D microstructures embedding controllable 
cells 
After fibroblasts (NIH/3T3) were cultured inside the 
incubator, collected cells were mixed with PEGDA solution 
(including 20% PEGDAs (molecular weight 700, Sigma 
Aldrich), 0.5% photoinitiator (Irgacure 2959, Ciba), and PBS 
(Phosphate Buffered Saline, Wako)). Solution was injected 
inside the PDMS coated channel, and then movable 2D 
microstructures embedding cells (NIH/3T3) were fabricated 
directly inside microfluidic devices as shown in Fig. 2. As the 
donuts shaped mask was used, the donut-shaped 
Fig. 2 Fabricated movable microstructures embedding fibroblasts 
(NIH/3T3), with different outer diameter (OD.) and inner diameter (ID.) 
 
Fig. 3 Movable microstructures embedding microbeads of which the 
concentration (number) is controllable 
5837
  
microstructure was fabricated. Donut-shaped microstructure 
could be used as the building layers of the tubular structures 
as mentioned in Fig.1.  
The diameters of the cell embedded microstructures were 
controlled by the masks (able to be form 100 ?m to several 
hundred microns. The cells inside the microstructures are 
randomly distributed and uncontrollable. However, in natural 
way, cells inside body are not randomly distributed but with 
different distribution in different locations. Therefore it is 
important to control the cell concentration inside certain areas 
for in vitro culture. In our previous work, a microfluidic 
device integrated with dielectrophoresis was developed and 
microstructures embedding controllable numbers of particles 
were fabricated on-chip [16]. Fig. 3 shows the fabricated 
microstructures with different numbers of microbeads. This 
method is able to be used for fabricating the desired 2D 
microstructures as the building blocks for 3D structures. 
 
 
III. FLUIDIC SELF-ASSEMBLY FOR MULTILAYERED 
MICROSTRUCTURES 
A. Design and fabrication of the 2-layer PDMS 
microfluidic device 
In view of constructing 3D tubular structures via on-chip 
fabricated 2D movable microstructures, the fluidic 
self-assembly based on axis translation was involved. A 
microfluidic device with 2 PDMS layer (upper part and 
bottom part) was presented for constructing 3D structures, 
including a micro well for axis translation and a micro groove 
for releasing the solution, as shown in Fig. 4. This device is 
for conducting both on-chip fabrication and self-assembly of 
microstructures inside one microfluidic channel, which 
provides an efficient way of constructing tubular structures as 
a factory assembly line. 
The upper part is commonly designed with a 500 ?m width 
channel for providing the space of microstructure on-chip 
fabrication. There is a micro well inside the bottom part for 
assembling the movable microstructures by axis translation. 
The micro groove is for releasing the solution and stopping 
the assembled microstructures. The thickness of the 
fabricated microstructures is controlled by the depth of the 
channel in the upper part, which is about 35 ?m, and then the 
thickness of fabricated microstructures will be about 30 ?m 
[16]. The depth of the well is 100 ?m and the length is 500?m. 
The width of the groove is 35 ?m. The concept of the 
axis-translation self-assembly is described as follow. The 
fabricated microstructures are flowed horizontally with the 
solution, into the micro well. Following the flow direction, 
the microstructures are rotated 90 degrees (axis translation 
from the original position to the assembly position) to be 
vertical inside the micro well and stopped at the end of the 
micro well, because they are not able to go into the micro 
groove. The stopped microstructures will be assembled one 
by one. Finally, a tubular 3D structure embedding large 
amount of cells is formed inside the micro well.  
The fabrication method of this 2-layer microfluidic device 
is based on the conventional photolithography method. Here 
the two PDMS parts were bonded together and the channels 
were aligned under microscope manipulation stage. The 
fabricated upper and bottom PDMS parts are bonded together 
to form the micro channel. The top views of the microfluidic 
channels are shown in Fig. 5(a). It is for testing the 
self-assembly as preliminary experiments. The width of the 
micro well and groove is about 120 ?m and 35 ?m 
respectively. And the depth of the upper channel and micro 
well is 35 ?m and 100 ?m respectively. All the parameters are 
acceptable according to the design. 
 
B. Experimental results of self-assembly 
For the assembly tests, the microstructures without cells or 
beads were used. Sample solution was injected to the inlet of 
the channel. Negative pressure was given from the outlet by a 
syringe pump. The on-chip fabrication and fluidic 
Fig.4 A schematic drawing of the two-layer microfluidic device for 
self-assembly of movable microstructures 
 
 
Fig. 5 Fabricated microfluidic channel and the preliminary assembly result 
 
5838
  
self-assembly were conducted inside the device. The 
experimental results of self-assembly are shown in Fig. 5(b). 
Movable 2D microstructures were continually fabricated 
inside upper part channel and then moved with solution flow 
into the micro well of bottom part. The microstructures 
rotated 90 degrees and became vertical, assembled at the 
entrance of the micro groove. The axis translation was 
succeeded. 6 layers were assembled to form a tubular 
structure. The great advantage of this method is that the 
whole assembly process is performed without any outside 
manipulation. However, this is the preliminary results with 
some problems. As shown in Fig. 5(b), there are some 
microstructures outside the micro well and failed to be 
assembled. Improvements are needed. 
 
 
IV. IMPROVEMENTS OF THE MICROFLUIDIC CHANNEL FOR 
SELF-ASSEMBLY 
A. Improved fabrication channel with a funneled structure 
In the previous channel, the width of the fabrication 
channel is larger than the micro well so that some donuts are 
failed to be assembled. We added a funneled structure at the 
end of the fabrication channel to make sure that the fabricated 
movable microstructures go into the micro well smoothly. As 
shown in Fig. 6(a), all the 2D microstructures are flowed into 
the micro well and the axis was translated. Fig. 6(b) shows the 
fabricated microfluidic channel with a funneled structure. 
The width of the end of the fabrication channel is the same as 
the micro well. Microstructures are able to flow into the 
micro well smoothly via this funneled structure, for avoiding 
the previous problem in Fig. 5(b). 
 
B. Experimental results 
The improved self-assembly was conducted by 
donut-shaped microstructures inside this improved channel, 
as shown in Fig. 7. All the microstructures were successfully 
flowed into the micro well and assembled. The axis 
translation of each 2D layer was succeeded. A multilayered 
tubular microstructure with 14 layers was assembled in 19 
seconds (about 0.7 layers per second, averagely). The 
fabrication time was not considered here and just the 
assembly time was counted, for evaluating the assembly 
efficiency. The inner hollow of this tubular structure is shown 
clearly in the micrograph. The result demonstrated the 
function of the funneled structure for the assembly in the 
channel. 
 
C. Improved channel with 3 micro grooves 
Based on the experimental results, we think the assembly 
efficiency may be influenced by the flow velocity, which 
means that if the flow velocity is higher the assembly time 
can be shorter. The inner hollow of this tube-shaped structure 
and the section size of the micro groove influence the flow 
velocity. However, there is only one micro groove in the 
previous microfluidic channel. The channel was improved by 
adding 2 more grooves inside, as shown in Fig. 8(a). The area 
for releasing the solution was increased. 
Fig. 8(b) shows the calculation results of the section size of 
the micro grooves in both cases (the previous case with 1 
groove and the improved case with 3 grooves). The section 
size of the improved channel (5000 ?m
2
) was about 5 times 
larger than the previous one (800 ?m
2
). It is expected that the 
flow velocity will be increased in the improved channel. Fig. 
9(a) shows the fabricated channel with 3 micro grooves. 
 
D. Experimental results 
Fig. 9(b) shows the comparison results between the 
previous and the improved channels. During about 3 seconds 
of assembly process, 4 layers were assembled in the improved 
channel, while just 3 layers were assembled in the previous 
channel. Besides, the alignment of the assembled structures in 
the previous channel was not as good as the ones in the 
improved channel. 
In the improved channel, it was possible to assemble more 
than 1 layer within 1 second (about 1.3 layers per second, 
averagely). It was faster than the previous result (0.7 layers 
per second). Fig. 9(c) shows a 3D tubular structure with 16 
 
Fig. 6 Improved microfluidic channel with a funneled structure 
 
Fig. 7 Improved self-assembly result of constructing multilayered tubular 
microstructures 
5839
  
layers, constructed in the channel. Both the higher efficiency 
and the closed environment are able to be obtained in the 
presented device. Based on this improved microfluidic 
channel, the assembly of cell embedded microstructures was 
conducted. Fig. 10 shows the assembly result. Cells were 
encapsulated inside the donuts and assembled as a tubular 
structure based on the axis translation method. The result 
shows great potential to be used in high-throughput 
construction of 3D tubular structures for building cellular 
structures or in vitro tissue models. 
 
E. Discussion 
Self-assembly of the microstructures was demonstrated. 
However, the experiment result is still preliminarily, because 
of several unsolved problems. One is how to connect the 
assembled layers after assembly. The other one is how to 
remove the assembly structures from the microfluidic channel 
to the outside. 
For solving the first problem, a secondary UV exposure is a 
good choice. After assembly, the solution in the channel can 
be replaced to water, which is not photo-crosslinkable. Then 
secondary UV exposure will be given to the whole assemble 
structure. Then the layers will be firmly connected as one 
tube, which has been demonstrated in [15]. One thing should 
be noted is that the UV is not good for cells. The cell viability 
should be evaluated after secondary UV exposure. For 
solving the second problem, we think we can directly separate 
the 2 layers to open the channel and collect the assembled 
tubes. However, the opened devices cannot be used again. 
Other methods for collecting the assembled tubes need be 
developed. 
The alignment of assembled layers was not good enough. 
There is displacement between some layers. The reason is 
that the diameter of microstructures is smaller than the width 
of micro well. It may be solved by modifying the size of the 
channel. Besides, there were no cells inside the used 
microstructures in assembly experiments. For the next step, 
assembly of cell embedded structures should be conducted. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we reported a novel method of constructing 
3D multilayered tubular structures based on axis translation 
of 2D microstructures inside microfluidic devices. The 
 
Fig. 9 Experimental results of self-assembly via the improved microfluidic 
channel with higher efficiency. 
 
 
Fig. 8 Improved microfluidic channel with 3 micro grooves and the 
caculation of the the section size for releasing the solution 
 
5840
  
on-chip fabrication of movable 2D cell embedded 
microstructures based on PEGDA was reported. Novel 
two-layered microfluidic devices with a micro well and micro 
groove were fabricated. The self-assembly and the axis 
translation of the 2D microstructures were experimentally 
demonstrated. For improving the assembly results, the 
funneled structure and 3 micro grooves were added in the 
channel. The improved self-assembly of constructing 3D 
multilayered tubular microstructures with higher efficiency 
was demonstrated. The tubular microstructures were able to 
be used as engineered vascular-like tubes for in vitro 
applications. The result shows great potential to be used in 
high-throughput construction of 3D tubular structures for 
building in vitro tissue models. 
For the future works, the cell viability will be confirmed 
after assembly. Microfluidic devices for self-assembly should 
be improved and the on-chip extraction function should be 
added.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially supported by Japan MEXT 
KAKENHI (Hyper Bio Assembler for 3D Cellular Systems 
(BioAssembler)) Grant Number 23106006, and Nagoya 
University Global COE Program (COE for Education and 
Research of Micro-Nano Mechatronics). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. G. Chung, L. F. Kang, and A. Khademhosseini, “Micro- and 
nanoscale technologies for tissue engineering and drug discovery 
applications,” Expert Opinion on Drug Discovery, vol. 2, no. 12, pp. 
1653-1668, Dec, 2007 
[2] A. Khademhosseini, J. P. Vacanti & R. Langer, “Progress in Tissue 
Engineering,” Scientific American, vol. 300,  pp. 64 – 71, 2009. 
[3] E. J. Suuronen, H. Sheardown, K. D. Newman et al., "Building In Vitro 
Models of Organs," International Review of Cytology, W. J. Kwang, 
ed., pp. 137-173: Academic Press, 2005 
[4] R. Langer, and J. P. Vacanti, “Tissue Engineering,” Science, vol. 260, 
no. 5110, pp. 920-926, May, 1993 
[5] S. R. Khetani, and S. N. Bhatia, “Engineering tissues for in vitro 
applications,” Current Opinion in Biotechnology, vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 
524-531, 2006 
[6] H. Kaji, G. Camci-Unal, R. Langer et al., “Engineering systems for the 
generation of patterned co-cultures for controlling cell-cell interactions,” 
Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta-General Subjects, vol. 1810, no. 3, pp. 
239-250, Mar, 2011 
[7] H. Tsutsui, et al., "Efficient Dielectrophoretic Patterning of Embryonic 
Stem Cells in Energy Landscapes Defined by Hydrogel Geometries," 
Annals of Biomedical Engineering, vol. 38, pp. 3777-3788, Dec 2010. 
[8] A. Tixier-Mita, J. Jun, S. Ostrovidov, M. Chiral, M. Frenea, B Le 
Pioufle, H. Fujita, "A silicon micro-system for parallel gene 
transfection into arrayed cells," Proceedings of the uTAS 2004 
Symposium, The Royal Society of Chemistry, pp. 180-1822004  
[9] D. Di Carlo, N. Aghdam, and L. P. Lee, "Single-cell enzyme 
concentrations, kinetics, and inhibition analysis using high-density 
hydrodynamic cell isolation arrays," Analytical Chemistry, vol. 78, no. 
14, pp. 4925-4930, Jul, 2006 
[10] D. Dendukuri, D. C. Pregibon, J. Collins et al., “Continuous-flow 
lithography for high-throughput microparticle synthesis,” Nature 
Materials, vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 365-369, May, 2006 
[11] T. Yue, M. Nakajima, M. Kojima, and T. Fukuda, "High speed cell 
patterning by dielectrophoresis and on-chip fabrication of 
microstructure embedding patterned cells", Proc. of the 2012 IEEE Int. 
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA2012), pp. 4582-4587, 2012 
[12] Y. T. Matsunaga, Y. Morimoto, and S. Takeuchi, “Molding Cell Beads 
for Rapid Construction of Macroscopic 3D Tissue Architecture,” 
Advanced Materials, vol. 23, no. 12, pp. H90-H94, 2011 
[13] M. Yamada, R. Utoh, K. Ohashi et al., “Controlled formation of 
heterotypic hepatic micro-organoids in anisotropic hydrogel 
microfibers for long-term preservation of liver-specific functions,” 
Biomaterials, vol. 33, no. 33, pp. 8304-8315, 2012 
[14] P. Panda, S. Ali, E. Lo, B.G. Chung, T.A. Hatton, A. Khademhosseini, 
and P.S. Doyle, “Stop-flow lithography to generate cell-laden microgel 
particles,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 8, (no. 7), pp. 1056-1061, 2008 
[15] Y. Du, M. Ghodousi, H. Qi et al., “Sequential assembly of cell-laden 
hydrogel constructs to engineer vascular-like microchannels,” 
Biotechnology and Bioengineering, vol. 108, pp. 1693-1703, 2011 
[16] T. Yue, M. Nakajima, H. Tajima and T. Fukuda. “Fabrication of 
Microstructures Embedding Controllable Particles Inside 
Dielectrophoretic Microfluidic Devices”, International Journal of 
Advanced Robotic Systems, vol.10. Published online, 15 Feb., 2013 
[17] T. Yue, M. Nakajima, C. Hu, Y. Shen, H. Tajima and T. Fukuda. 
“Fabrication and self-assembly of movable microstructures embedding 
cells inside microfluidic devices”. Proc. of the 2012 Int. Conf. on 
Miniaturized Systems for Chemistry and Life Sciences (MicroTAS2012), 
pp.1153-1155, 2012 
[18] G.M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, "Self-assembly at all scales," 
Science, vol. 295, (no. 5564), pp. 2418-2421, 2002 
[19] W. Zheng and H.O. Jacobs, "Fabrication of multicomponent 
microsystems by directed three-dimensional self-assembly," Advanced 
Functional Materials, vol. 15, (no. 5), pp. 732-738, 2005 
[20] T. M. Schneider, et al., "Algorithm for a Microfluidic Assembly Line," 
Physical Review Letters, vol. 106, Feb 2011. 
[21] S.E. Chung, Y. Jung, and S. Kwon, "Three-Dimensional Fluidic 
Self-Assembly by Axis Translation of Two-Dimensionally Fabricated 
Microcomponents in Railed Microfluidics," Small, vol. 7, (no. 6), pp. 
796-803, 2011 
[22] V. Chan, P. Zorlutuna, J.H. Jeong, H. Kong, and R. Bashir, 
“Three-dimensional photopatterning of hydrogels using 
stereolithography for long-term cell encapsulation,” Lab on a Chip, vol. 
10, (no. 16), pp. 2062-2070, 2010. 
 
 
Fig. 10 The assembly result of cell embedded tubular structures based on 
the axis translation self-assembly method. 
 
5841
