Gliding, Swimming and Walking: Development of multi-functional
underwater robot Glide Walker
Hirotaka Komura
1
, Satoshi Kitano
1
, Hiroya Yamada
2
and Gen endo
1
Abstract—In order to investigate under the sea, various
types of underwater robots have been developed. However,
most robots can only perform one type of moving such as
screw, water gliding or walking, even though there are some
creatures which use various types of locomotion in the wild life.
Thus, we propose a new type of underwater robot, the ”Glide
Walker”, which can change its way of locomotion between
gliding, walking and swimming depending on the situation. It
can be performed by using its two wings with 3 DOFs each
and its tail with 1 DOF. This article presents the basic concept,
the moving strategy and the mechanical design of the robot
in details. Moreover, it also presents the developed prototype,
as well as the conducted experiments in which the robot was
able to perform the three ways of locomotion successfully.
Additionally, it also shows the high manipulation capability
and the loop maneuver performance of the robot when in the
swimming mode.
I. INTRODUCTION
Under the sea, where the mystery of the earth is few
human expeditions have been conducted. This place contains
the remains of primitive lives from an ancient era, being
therefore an immense experimental ﬁeld. However, up until
nowthishasbeenafrontierfortherobotsdevelopeduntilthe
moment, which has encourage the development of various
kinds of underwater robots for investigations under the sea
in the recent years. These underwater robots can be mainly
classiﬁed into Cruising-type, Hovering-type, Gliding-type
andWalking-type.Amongallthetypesofunderwaterrobots,
the most common is the Cruising-type which has a body
equipped with one torpedo type screw and which is able to
collects data (e.g.,Urashima developed by JAMSTEC [1]).
Hovering-type robots, which have several screws in all di-
rections, have the ability of controlling position and posture.
Because of this ability, these robots are also equipped with
a manipulator and are used for investigation of the seabed.
One example is the Shinkai 6500 [2], robot developed by
JAMSTEC for deep sea investigation as its name suggests.
It is equipped with six screws which are divided into two
for main propulsion, two for side movements and two for
vertical movements. It is also equipped with a manipulators
whichisusedtocollectobjects.Gliding-typerobotsbasically
don’t have any screw but have a wing like a glider to propel
by using gravity force or buoyancy force developed. As
they consume energy only to control its buoyancy, they can
1
H. Komura, S. Kitano and G. Endo are with the Department of Me-
chanical and Aerospace Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2-12-1
Ookayama, Meguroku, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan, kitano.s.ac, komura.h.aa
at m.titech.ac.jp,
2
H. Yamada is with the Global Edge Institute , Tokyo
Institute of Technology, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguroku, Tokyo, 152-8552,
Japan, yamada at robotics.mes.titech.ac.jp,
cruise longer distances than a screw equipped underwater
robot,Therefore, they are used for observation of wide areas
under the sea. Additionally, Gliding-type robots don’t emit
any disturbance such as noise, vibration and wave to the
environment. Some Gliding-type robots have been already
developed as commercial products [3], [4]. Arima et al.
developed a new gliding-type robot which is equipped with
two screws instead of ballast to go underwater, and can
perform three dimensional maneuver with controllable wings
[5]. To investigate the sea bed, the ability to move slowly
along the bottom of the sea is needed. For Cruising-type,
Hovering-typeandGliding-typerobots,thisisaverydifﬁcult
task once there are continuous currents under the sea and
thoserobotsdonothaveanylegsorhandstokeepthemselves
still. To achieve this task, the walking-type underwater robot
was developed [6], [7]. Juan, B.H. et al studied multi-legged
ROV ”CR200 [8], [9]” for investigation of the seabed under
strong current. This robot has six legs and two out of them
are also used as arms for precise manipulation.
Although these underwater robots were designed for one
specialized way of moving, in the wild life there are
some creatures which performs several types of locomotion.
For example, the abyssal ﬁsh ”Tripod ﬁsh (Bathypterois
atricolor)Fig.1(a)” has long rays and can stand with a special
ﬁn like a tripod in order to save energy. Another example
is the ”Epaulette shark (Hemiscyllium ocellatum)Fig.1(b)”
which is well known as ”Walking shark”. This ﬁsh can not
only swim, but also can move on rough terrains, such as
coral reefs, by using its ﬁns in a way similar to walking.
For terrestrial animals, these changes of way of locomotion
(a) Tripod ﬁsh (b) Walking shark
Fig. 1. The creature which uses several motion
Fig. 2. Glide Walker
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2944
