  
Abstract — Evaluation of individual gait pattern is important 
for both abnormal gait diagnosis and gait rehabilitation in 
mobility impaired people. In this paper, semi-Markov process 
(SMP) is applied to model and analyze human gait in level 
walking. Gait states are detected from ground reaction forces 
(GRFs), and gait cycles are described as state transitions in a 
gait Markov chain (GMC) with sojourn times. Several gait 
features are defined and online estimated based on the SMP 
model. With this model, abnormal gait patterns are further 
analyzed and indexes for gait abnormality assessment are 
proposed. Experiments of gait analyses with proposed method 
are conducted on subjects with different health conditions. 
Results show that individual gait pattern can be successfully 
obtained and evaluated. Potential applications in gait diagnosis 
and powered lower limb orthosis (PLLO) control for gait 
assistance are also discussed. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
As the number of elderly people and patients suffering 
from impaired mobility increases, there is a growing demand 
for abnormal gait diagnosis and gait rehabilitation. Clinical 
gait diagnostic methods depend on standard gait analysis in 
gait lab. It usually takes a lot of time to process huge amount 
of gait data and characterize abnormal gait, and experienced 
physical therapists are needed to provide rehabilitation 
suggestions based on these data. Recently, assistive devices 
like powered lower limb orthoses (PLLO) were designed to 
help people with abnormal gait. In order to provide effective 
gait assistance, PLLO control is also based on real-time 
analysis of the wearer’s gait information. Therefore, gait 
analysis is important for gait diagnosis and rehabilitation. 
Different gait analysis methods have been developed by 
researchers in various applications. Two types of gait data 
commonly used for gait analysis are joint kinematics and 
ground reaction forces (GRFs). In applications like PLLO 
control, gait analysis was done online with gait data collected 
from wearable sensors. Here gait cycle is usually divided into 
several simple stages, and different control objectives can be 
set for each stage to achieve better bionic functions. For 
example, in HAL [1,2] and Vanderbilt Exoskeleton [3] 
control for paralytic assistance, walking was divided into 
three to four stages and gait data like GRFs or joint angles 
were monitored for state transitions. Some other methods 
focused more on gait modeling and abnormal diagnosis, and 
these are often offline processes where gait models were 
H. Ma is with the Department of Mechanical and Automation 
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong 
SAR, China. hma@mae.cuhk.edu.hk. 
W. H. Liao is with the Department of Mechanical and Automation 
Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, Hong Kong 
SAR, China. And he is also with Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese 
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China. whliao@mae.cuhk.edu.hk. 
trained with gait data. Chen [4], Alvarez [5] and Tilmanne [6] 
used Hidden Markov Model (HMM) or Finite State Machine 
(FSM) to model the gait states in their models, but they do 
not have clear physical meaning to be mapped to foot events 
or joint functions. Bae and Tomizuka proposed a HMM 
model with state defined on foot-ground contact conditions 
for abnormal gait diagnosis [7]. Abnormal state transitions 
were checked by state transition matrix. However, their 
model was only based on gait data associated with single leg, 
and gait abnormality was assessed through state transition 
probabilities without modeling the timing. 
Considering the limitations of the above gait analysis 
methods, we would like to develop a novel gait modeling and 
analysis method that can model both state transitions and 
their timing based on GRF information. This method is 
desired to estimate individual gait pattern of level walking in 
an ideal environment, like in gait experiment and 
rehabilitation. And obtained gait model is expected to be 
further applied in abnormal gait diagnosis and PLLO control 
for gait assistance. In our previous work [8], states 
representing foot-ground contact forms of both legs were 
defined and estimated from GRFs. Gait cycle was described 
in a FSM, but the gait modeling was rough and incomplete. 
In this paper, we will introduce the well-defined gait model 
based on semi-Markov process, and then apply it in gait 
pattern evaluation and abnormality diagnosis.  
The content of this paper is arranged as follows. Section 
II gives out human gait model based on semi-Markov process. 
Section III introduces the gait analysis methods for online 
estimation of individual gait pattern. Section IV proposes the 
indexes for evaluating gait abnormality. Section V presents 
the experimental results of level walking on subjects with 
different health conditions and some further discussion. 
Section VI summarizes the work. 
II. GAIT MODELING WITH SEMI-MARKOV PROCESS 
Human gait has cyclical nature with sequential 
movements in both legs. Since human body configuration 
and lower limb joint functions keep changing during walking, 
we can define states to represent specific foot-ground contact 
condition or joint kinematics within gait cycle. Then gait 
cycle is described as a series of states with transitions at 
specific timing. In order to model individual gait pattern, both 
state transitions and their timing should be considered. 
Besides, human gait is a stochastic process, that means for 
each person state sequence and state durations may be 
different in each gait cycle [7]. Based on the above 
considerations, we model human gait as a semi-Markov 
process, and gait cycles are described as state transitions in a 
gait Markov chain (GMC) with sojourn times. 
Human Level Walking Gait Modeling and Analysis based on 
Semi-Markov Process 
Hao Ma and Wei-Hsin Liao 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 240
  
TABLE I. STATE DEFINITIONS OF HUMAN GAIT IN LEVEL GROUND 
 
A. Gait State Transition Graph 
In this research, we focus on studying gait information 
from GRFs. A pair of pressure shoe pads are designed to 
measure GRFs at specific locations, so that foot-ground 
contact of a single leg can be divided into: Heel Contact (HC), 
Full Contact (FC), Toe Contact (TC), and Swing (SW). Then 
we define state as specific combination of contact forms in 
both legs, and it can be detected from GRFs through fuzzy 
inference as described in our previous paper [8]. Table I 
shows the state definitions for possible contact combinations 
of both legs in level ground walking. Four combinations are 
further separated according to relative positions of two legs.  
Then based on physical process of human gait, the 
general state transition graph for level walking is proposed 
in Fig. 1. It is directed, connected, and circular with 18 
nodes for defined states, and 30 directed connections for 
possible state transitions during level walking. A gait cycle 
always contains 8 states based on this graph, so that we 
divide the graph into 8 stages, with state 14 as the 1st stage. 
This state transition graph considers both heel-to-toe and 
toe-to-heel walking, where single leg full contact (state 14 
and 8) always exist in the gait cycle. But special cases like 
toe-walking and heel-walking are not discussed in this paper. 
In actual walking, two situations may cause different state 
transitions that violate our model. For measurement errors, 
like skipping a state which is too short, we add the expected 
missing state according to reasonable state sequence. For 
reciprocating motion between two states, like state sequence 
14?2?3?2?3?4, we simplify it into no reciprocating 
motion gait. After processing, we can describe the actual gait 
into the state transition graph in the form of Fig. 1. 
B. Semi-Markov Process 
Based on gait state transition graph, state can transfer to 
different descendants to form different state sequence. These 
variations in gait pattern can be found in different person, or 
even different gait cycles of a person. Thus, we introduce 
state transition probabilities into gait model to describe the 
stochastic characteristics of individual gait pattern. 
Discrete-time Markov chain is a powerful tool to model 
stochastic process with Markov property on a finite state 
space [9]. The Markov property means that the state 
transition probability depends only on the current state of the 
system, not on the states of the system at previous steps. 
Human gait could be approximately considered to have 
Markov property, so that we could model state transitions of 
human gait as a discrete-time Markov chain, namely gait 
 
Figure 1. General level walking state transition graph 
Markov chain (GMC). The state diagram of GMC is just the 
state transition graph in Fig. 1. A complete GMC should also 
include the state transition probabilities, which mean the 
weight of each connection in the state diagram. For gait 
analysis purpose, it is reasonable to assume human gait in 
gait experiment is in ideal environment without external 
assistance or disturbance. In this case, GMC should be 
time-homogeneous with a stationary gait pattern.  
However, GMC can only model state transitions without 
considering their timing. In order to add state durations into 
the model, a discrete-state continuous-time semi-Markov 
process (SMP) is further considered for human gait modeling. 
SMP is one kind of Markov process, in which the time 
interval of each state has an arbitrary distribution [10]. It 
consists of an embedded Markov chain, GMC in our case, 
and a sequence of sojourn times between state transitions. 
The basic idea of SMP is shown in Fig. 2. Besides Markov 
property of GMC, the Markov assumptions in human gait 
SMP also include that sojourn time of a state just depends on 
current and the last states. Mean of sojourn time  ( ) in 
state   after transition from state   is denoted as  
?
   
, and 
we further define the sojourn time conditional only on current 
state as  
?
 
 for later calculations. 
 
?
   
   [ ( )| (   )    ( )  ]       (1) 
 
?
 
  [ ( )| ( )  ]             (2) 
C. Gait Features in Semi-Markov Process 
Based on the SMP model of human gait, several gait 
features are defined for characterizing individual gait pattern. 
These features represent both state transitions and their 
timing in the gait cycle. The first two features are used to 
describe the GMC, including weights of connections and 
limiting probability of each state derived from these weights. 
And the latter two features are used to estimate the average 
duration of each state in the SMP. 
In later analysis, the finite state set of SMP is denoted as 
    
 
  
 
   
  
 . For any state    , its ancestor set is 
denoted as  
 
, and this contains all states that have direct 
connection pointed to   in GMC. Similarly, the descendant 
set is denoted as  
 
.  
 
 is the state set of stage  .  
 
Figure 2. Sample path of a semi-Markov process 
241
  
1) State Transition Probability (STP): State transition 
probability  
  
   [ ( )  | (   )  ] stands for the 
probability of the transition from   to  . It can be used to 
predict the next state based on current one during walking. 
Then transition matrix of GMC is defined with 1-step state 
transition probability  
  
. Since only transitions from   to its 
descendent state    
 
 may have  
  
  , transition matrix 
is actually a sparse matrix. From the definition of state 
transition probability, we can obtain (3). Especially, if    
 
 
we will have  
  
  .  
∑ 
     
 ∑ 
     
 
                (3) 
2) State Probability (SP): State probability is defined as 
the limiting probability of each state  
 
    
   
 
   
( )
, where 
lower case  
   
( )
 denotes   steps probability from state   to 
  [9]. It stands for the probability of a state appearing in gait 
cycle. Since GMC is periodic with 8 stages, state probability 
is actually related to the specific stage. For state   and   in 
stage    and  , let      (   ) (    ) where   is 
number of gait cycles within these two states. Since state 14 
is the only state in stage 1, all states will go to state 14 after 
several steps. So for any state  , we have  
    
   and 
 
  
  . Then from Chapman-Kolmogov equation, we will 
obtain (4) and (5). Actually we can derive all the state 
probabilities from state transition probabilities and within 
each stage the state probabilities add together equal to 1. 
 
 
    
   
 
   
( )
    
   
 
    
(    )
 
     
(  )
 
    
(   )
    
   
 
    
(   )
 (4) 
 
 
 ∑ 
 
 
   
 ∑ 
 
 
     
 
             (5) 
3) Mean Intrinsical Percentage of State (IPS): 
Conditional mean intrinsical percentage of state (CIPS) 
 
   
 
 ?
   
 ?
 is defined as the mean sojourn time of state   
transferred from   over mean gait cycle duration. It can be 
used to predict the sojourn time of current state during 
walking. And similarly  
 
 
 ?
 
 ?
 is further defined as the 
mean sojourn time of state   over mean gait cycle duration. 
From the definition of mean sojourn time in (1) and (2), we 
can obtain relationship (6) and (7) based on Bayes' theorem. 
 
?
 
  [ ( )| ( )  ] 
 ∑ ( [ ( )| ( )    (   )  ] 
  
 
 
 
 
)
 
 
 
 
 
∑ 
  
 
 
 
?
    
(6) 
 
 
 
 ?
 
 ?
 
 
 
 
 ?
∑ 
  
 
 
 
?
    
 
 
 
 
∑ 
  
 
 
 
    
    (7) 
4) Mean Percentage of State (PS): The average 
percentage of state  
 
 stands for the limiting percentage of 
time spend in state   in the gait cycle. It represents the 
overall time distribution of each state in the gait cycle. Based 
on previous defined features, it is clear that the time spent in 
state   should be proportional to  
 
 
?
 
. Then we can obtain 
expression (8). Of course, the mean percentages of all the 
states add together should be 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 ?
 
 ?
  
 
 
 
 ∑ 
  
 
 
 
    
          (8) 
Overall, these four gait features defined above can be 
summarized in Table II. With SMP model individual gait can 
be described as a sequence of state with specific GMC and 
timing. As the result, individual gait pattern is presented as 
state transition graph with 4 groups of gait features. 
TABLE II. GAIT FEATURES IN SEMI-MARKOV PROCESS 
 State Transition State 
GMC STP ( 
  
) SP ( 
 
) 
Timing CIPS ( 
   
) PS ( 
 
) 
D. Gait Pattern Online Estimation 
The features derived from SMP are designed to 
characterize individual gait pattern in both abnormal gait 
diagnosis and PLLO control. In order to be integrated with 
PLLO control, gait features should be estimated online based 
on gait data from wearable sensors like pressure shoe pads in 
this research.  
Considering the assumption of gait in ideal environment, 
individual gait pattern should have constant parameters in the 
gait model. And the estimations are updated at the end of 
each gait cycle and gradually converged to the actual values. 
As to the gait pattern variations in each gait cycle, we will 
consider and try to model them in the next section. Assume 
now we have an observation of SMP censored at fixed 
program cycle, and recorded the gait Markov chain 
  ( )  ( ) 
   
  with  ( )   . We introduce the 
following variables for estimation of gait features. 
?   ∑ 
  ( )    
 
   
 the number of gait cycles up to now; 
?  
 
  ∑ 
  ( )   
 
   
 the number of visits to state   in the 
GMC up to now; 
?  
   
 ∑ 
  (   )    ( )   
 
   
 the number of state 
transitions from   to   up to now; 
?   ∑ ( )
 
   
 the total time up to now; 
?  
   
 ∑ ( )
  (   )    ( )   
 
   
 the sojourn time in state   
with last state in   up to now; 
?  
 
 ∑ ( )
  ( )   
 
   
 the total sojourn time in state   up 
to now; 
?  
?
     the estimated mean gait cycle duration time. 
Referring to the definitions, SMP parameters estimations 
are summarized as (9) to (13). These values are updated per 
gait cycle, and they will finally converge to actual gait pattern 
parameters after large gait cycles [11].  
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
                     (9) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     (10) 
 
   
 
 ?
   
 ?
 
 
   
  
   
 ?
 
 
   
 
   
 ?
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
          (11) 
 
 
 
 ?
 
 ?
 
 
 
  
 
 ?
 
 
 
 
 
 ?
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            (12) 
 
 
 
 
 
 ?
 
 ?
 
( 
 
  
 
) ( 
 
  )
 ?
 
 
 
  ?
 
 
 
 
        (13) 
In the actual gait of a specific person, usually only part of 
states defined in SMP will occur. Therefore, as a result 
individual SMP can be simplified by removing the states and 
state transitions that have zero probabilities in general SMP. 
III. EVALUATION OF GAIT ABNORMALITY 
After individual gait pattern is obtained based on gait 
SMP model, we can further analyze the gait abnormality. 
This section introduces the abnormal diagnosis derived from 
state transition graph, and further proposes a few indexes for 
the overall gait abnormality assessment. 
242
  
 
Figure 3. Standard gait pattern within a gait cycle. 
 
Figure 4. Level walking state diagram with abnormal states/state transitions. 
A. Standard & Abnormal Gait Patterns 
Standard gait pattern of healthy people has symmetric 
motions of both legs with specific foot events and timing [12]. 
This is summarized in Fig. 3 with the standard state sequence 
(14?15?3?4?8?12?9?13) and percentages of state in 
gait cycle according to our definitions. In the general state 
diagram shown in Fig. 4, the standard state sequence is 
marked red with associated percentage of state in gait cycle. 
Then based on the deviations from the standard pattern in the 
state diagram, we then classify all the other states and state 
transitions into four abnormal levels (ALs). Here, an 
abnormal state transition means a transition from state with 
lower AL to state with higher AL. Different abnormal levels 
are shown in different colors in Fig. 4. Actual states and state 
transitions in AL 1 exist in normal gait, so we still consider 
them as part of normal pattern.  
B. Abnormal Evaluation Indexes 
In order to quantify the abnormality of individual gait 
pattern for gait diagnosis purpose, a series of Abnormality 
Evaluation Indexes (AEIs) are proposed in this research. 
Generally, there are three main criteria to determine the 
derivation between individual gait pattern and the standard 
one as listed below. Accordingly, three AEIs based on gait 
SMP model are defined.  
(1) Consistency of gait pattern in different gait cycles; 
(2) Whether abnormal states occur in gait cycles; 
(3) Derivation of stance/swing percentages in the gait 
cycle from standard pattern. 
1) AEI 1: Gait Pattern Consistency 
AEI1 is used to describe the consistency of gait pattern 
among all gait cycles. It is defined as one subtract the 
probability of the major state sequence. The more state 
sequence in each gait cycle varies, the larger AEI1 will be. 
And the range of AEI1 will be (0, 2). 
      (   
  
   
)               (14) 
A state sequence (SS) is defined as a cycle in GMC such 
that      
    
    
    
    
    
  with each state  
    
  
 
  
There are in total 64 possible SSs within a gait cycle 
according to general GMC, however, individual GMC may 
have only a few of them. The actual SS set for specific gait 
pattern is denoted as      
 
|           
  
 
    . Probability 
of a specific SS  
  
 is calculated as the product of all state 
transition probabilities along this SS as (15). Obviously,  
  
 
of all possible SSs add together should equal to 1. If the SS 
with maximal probability does not belong to normal SSs 
(contain only normal and AL1 states), then it is defined as 
major state sequence   
   
. Otherwise,   
   
 should also 
include other normal SSs with large probabilities. 
 
  
 (∏ 
 
    
  
      
 
   
)  
 
    
  
    
       (15) 
2) AEI 2: Abnormal States 
AEI2 is used to describe the abnormal states and state 
transitions occur in the individual GMC. The probability of 
abnormal states from abnormal state transitions in each level 
could be calculated as a vector shown in (16). Then AEI2 is 
considered as the weighted sum of abnormal state 
probabilities in all levels as (17). The weight vector gives 
larger values for higher abnormal levels, and the range of 
AEI2 is designed to be (0, 6). 
 
   
 [  
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
  
 
  
 
  
   
  
  
 
      
  
  
 
  
  
 
      
  
  
  
  
 ]               (16) 
     [               ]  
   
 
            (17) 
3) AEI 3: Stance/Swing Percentages 
AEI3 is used to describe the derivation of the current 
stance/swing percentages in the gait cycle from the standard 
pattern. In order to evaluate the percentages of stance/swing 
in the gait cycle, we divide the gait cycle into four support 
phases: Left Single Support (LSS), Double Support I (DSI), 
Right Single Support (RSS), and Double Support II (DSII). 
Then states are mapped to these support phases as shown in 
Fig. 5. The support phase percentage vector is defined as a 
vector of percentages for each support phase in the gait cycle. 
In standard pattern the support phase percentage vector  
   
 
is calculated as (18), and this is actually related to walking 
speed. For a specific SS,  
  
 is calculated from the mean 
percentage of state of the SS according to Fig. 4 by (19).  
 
   
 [ 
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
] 
 [                   ]             (18) 
                
  
 [∑ 
 
    
 
    
    
 ∑ 
 
    
 
    
    
   
∑ 
 
    
 
    
    
 ∑ 
 
    
 
    
     
]       (19) 
Then AEI3 is defined as the sum of error between support 
phase percentage vector and the standard one in (20). The 
estimated range of AEI3 will be within about (0, 2). 
      ∑ [(∑ | 
  
 
( )  
   
( )|
 
   
)  
  
 
]
  
 
  
  (20) 
 
Figure 5. Support phase division in state diagram 
243
  
Thus, the first two indexes are used to assess the 
abnormality in GMC, and the third one is used to evaluate the 
gait timing. Finally, the total AEI is calculated as the sum of 
each AEI. By allocating different coefficients for each AEI, 
the contribution of each term is well designed and balanced. 
IV. GAIT EXPERIMENTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
In this section, we apply the previously developed gait 
analysis method in the gait experiments of several subjects 
with different health conditions. Individual gait patterns are 
described as SMPs with specific gait features, and AEIs are 
further calculated. Discussions and comparisons are made to 
verify the feasibility of the proposed method in gait pattern 
estimation and abnormal gait diagnosis.  
A. Experimental Setup and Subjects 
In the experiment part, subjects with different health 
conditions are recruited. Gait patterns of healthy subjects are 
used to verify the gait model and study the variation of 
normal gait. And subjects with abnormal gait like the elderly 
and patient are also studied for verifying the abnormal gait 
diagnosis part. In total 11 subjects participated in the testing, 
and according to different age and health conditions, they are 
divided into 4 groups: young healthy (Y), middle-aged 
healthy (M), elderly (E), and patient (P). The average age for 
young healthy group (subject A~C) is 24, the middle-aged 
group (subject D~H) is 55, and the elderly group (subject I & 
J) is 75. A patient (subject K) with hemiplegia in the left side 
due to spine cord injury also enrolled in the testing. 
In the gait experiments, attachable shoe pads with 8 Force 
Sensing Resistors (FSRs) at specific locations are stuck to the 
bottom of the subjects’ shoes to measure GRFs during 
walking. Each subject was asked to walk on the level ground 
for 10 gait cycles, and individual gait pattern was estimated 
based on the GRF data during walking. Especially, the 
patient participated in the experiment twice, so as to check 
the consistency of the gait analysis results for abnormal gait. 
B. Gait Analysis Results 
As the result, gait patterns of each subject are shown in 
Fig. 6. These graphs represent the SMP models of individual 
gait pattern. In these graphs, the solid cycles stand for the 
major state sequences, red and brown values are the STPs 
and CIPSs of state transitions, green and blue values are the 
SPs and PSs of states. Some gait feature values that can be 
directly obtained from the state diagrams are omitted. In 
addition, abnormality evaluation results are summarized in 
Table III, and average values of each group are calculated. 
For young healthy group, the major state sequences are 
all standard state sequence, and sometimes AL 1 states (7 & 
10) may occur with small probabilities. This is in accordance 
with the previous analysis of normal pattern. The average 
AEI1 and AEI2 of this group are very small. AEI3 is a little 
larger since it is more susceptible to walking speed. The 
middle-aged healthy group also have normal state sequences 
as major pattern. But since they usually have smaller stride 
length, they are more likely to have AL 1 states instead of 
states 4 & 13. Generally, although this group still belongs to 
normal cases, they have more variations in state diagrams, 
and larger AEI values compared to the young healthy group. 
 
Figure 6. Individual gait pattern described as semi-Markov process
244
  
TABLE III. SUMMARY OF ABNORMAL EVALUATION INDEXES 
Subject AEI1 AEI2 AEI3 Total AEI 
A 0 0.1245 0.196 0.3205 
B 0.222 0.075 0.466 0.763 
C 0 0 0.244 0.244 
Y Avg 0.074 0.066 0.302 0.442 
D 0.4 0.72 0.63 1.75 
E 0 0.2295 0.396 0.6255 
F 0.216 0.633 0.55 1.399 
G 0.468 0.825 0.248 1.541 
H 0 0.4845 0.268 0.7525 
M Avg 0.216 0.579 0.418 1.213 
I 0.94 1.0995 0.782 2.8215 
J 0.182 0.675 0.284 1.141 
E Avg 0.562 0.888 0.534 1.984 
K1 1.388 2.571 0.906 4.865 
K2 1.066 2.6805 0.978 4.7245 
P Avg 1.228 2.628 0.942 4.798 
The elderly group has significant individual differences. 
Subject J has a normal gait pattern similar to middle-aged 
group, while subject I has a more disordered gait. As shown 
in the SMP model, subject I still has a normal major state 
sequence, but gait pattern has more variations with larger 
chance to go through abnormal states. As a result, the AEI 
values of subject I are clearly larger than normal cases. 
Patient K has participated in the gait experiment twice, 
and results are shown as K1 and K2. It can be found that gait 
pattern detected in two trials are quite close, which implies 
that with the developed method abnormal gait pattern can be 
successfully estimated within limited steps. The GMCs show 
quite different patterns compared to normal cases. High level 
abnormal states 7a, 11l or 6l, representing toe-to-heel 
walking of left leg, have large possibilities to occur in his 
hemiplegic gait. This gives significant large AEI2. Besides, 
he tended to have a much longer stance phase in the right leg, 
which can be found in percentages of state. This asymmetric 
motion results in quite different gait timing and a large AEI3.  
C. Discussions 
With SMP model, individual gait pattern can be 
successfully obtained and interpreted. By comparing the 
results of different groups, we can see that as age increases 
gait pattern is more variable, abnormal states have higher 
chance to occur, and the timing deviates more from normal 
case. And the patient’s gait pattern has significant deviation 
from normal pattern. These analysis results are also in 
accordance with actual characteristics of gait in each group.  
In order to verify the feasibility of the proposed gait 
model on both normal and abnormal cases, currently we 
selected 11 subjects with different health conditions. In the 
future, we plan to apply SMP model on more gait abnormal 
subjects, so that typical gait patterns of different patient 
groups can be summarized and differentiated for gait 
diagnosis. With more data AEIs can be further improved and 
thresholds can be set to assess different abnormality levels. 
Gait analysis based on SMP describes the gait cycle into a 
fine segmented state diagram with duration of each state 
estimable. States with durations can be mapped to different 
joint functions during walking for control purpose. Besides, 
by comparing actual abnormal state transition with the 
corresponding desired case, we can further find the 
disordered foot events. This is useful for motion adjustment 
in abnormal gait assistance. In this case, gait analysis and 
control can form a feedback system during walking. 
According to abnormal state transition detected, PLLO can 
adjust joint motions correspondingly to avoid the abnormal 
foot events, so as to gradually reduce the gait abnormality. 
Therefore, the developed model also has good potential to be 
integrated into PLLO controller design for gait assistance. 
V. CONCLUSION  
In this study, a semi-Markov process based human gait 
modeling and analysis method was developed. Individual gait 
pattern was described by gait Markov chain and duration of 
each state, and the gait features were estimated online. Based 
on SMP model, a series of Abnormal Evaluation Indexes 
were proposed for abnormal gait diagnosis. Gait experiments 
were conducted on subjects with different health conditions. 
Results showed that individual gait pattern and its 
abnormality can be successfully modeled and evaluated. In 
the future, we will apply the proposed gait analysis method in 
both abnormal gait diagnosis and PLLO control. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Start-up Support Scheme, 
Shenzhen Research Institute, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong. 
REFERENCES  
[1] A. Tsukahara, Y. Hasegawa, and Y. Sankai, “Gait support for 
complete spinal cord injury patient by synchronized leg-swing with 
HAL,” Proc. of the 2011 IEEE/RSJ Int’l Conf. on Intelligent Robots 
and Systems, San Francisco, CA, Sep. 2011, pp. 1737-1742. 
[2] H. Kawamoto, T. Hayashi, T. Sakurai, K. Eguchi, and Y. Sankai, 
“Development of single leg version of HAL for hemiplegia,” Proc. of 
the 31
st
 Annual Int’l Conf. of the IEEE EMBS, Minneapolis, 
Minnesota, Sep. 2009, pp. 5038-5043. 
[3] H. A. Quintero, R. J. Farris, and M. Goldfarb, “A method for the 
autonomous control of lower limb exoskeleton for persons with 
paraplegia,” Journal of Medical Devices, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 
041003-041003-6, 2012. 
[4] M. Chen, B. F. Huang, and Y. S. Xu, "Human abnormal gait modeling 
via Hidden Markov Model," Proc. of the 2007 IEEE Int’l Conf. 
on  Information Acquisition, Jeju City, Korea, July 8-11, 20107, pp. 
517-522. 
[5] A. A. Alvarez, G. Trivino, and O. Cordon, “Human gait modeling 
using a genetic fuzzy finite state machine,” IEEE Trans. Fuzzy System, 
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 205-223, Apr. 2012. 
[6] J. Tilmanne, A. Moinet, and T. Dutoit, “Stylistic gait synthesis based 
on hidden Markov models,” EURASIP Journal on Advances in Signal 
Processing, 2012, 2012:72. 
[7] J. Bae and M. Tomizuka, “Gait phase analysis based on a Hidden 
Markov Model,” Journal of Mechatronics, vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 961-970, 
2011. 
[8] H. Ma, W. Y. Lai, W. H. Liao, T. P. Fong, and K. M. Chan, “Design 
and control of a powered knee orthosis for gait assistance,” Proc. of 
the 2013 IEEE/ASME Int’l Conf. on Advanced Intelligent 
Mechatronics, Wollongong, Australia, July 9-12, 2013, pp. 816-821. 
[9] M. Lefebvre, Applied Stochastic Process. New York: Springer, 2000, 
ch. 3. 
[10] R. G. Gallager, Discrete Stochastic Processes. Boston: Kluwer, 1996, 
ch. 6. 
[11] V. S. Barbu, J. Bulla, and A. Maruotti, “Estimation of the stationary 
distribution of a semi-Markov chain,” Journal of Reliability and 
Statistical Studies, vol. 5, Issue Special, pp. 15-26, 2012. 
[12] J. Rose and J. G. Gamble, Human walking. Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins, 2006, ch. 3. 
245
