  
? 
Abstract— The unique characteristics of origami to realize 
3-D shape from 2-D patterns have been fascinating many 
researchers and engineers. This paper presents a fabrication of 
origami patterned fabric wheels that can deform and change the 
radius of the wheels. PVC segments are enclosed in the fabrics to 
build a tough and foldable structure. A special cable driven 
mechanism was designed to allow the wheels to deform while 
rotating.  A mobile robot with two origami wheels has been built 
and tested to show that it can deform its wheels to overcome 
various obstacles.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
In this paper, we present a deformable wheel robot based 
on origami structure wheels. Origami means the traditional 
Japanese art of paper folding. The unique characteristic of 
origami to realize 3-D shape from 2-D patterns has been 
fascinating many researchers and engineers [1]. In prior 
research, the author used an origami structure as a special kind 
of morphing structure [2, 3]. The main part of the wheel, a 
complex jointed 3D surface can be created by simple 2D 
fabrication method composed of rigid and flexible layers. 
Moreover, the movement of the whole structure was 
constrained by structural characteristics, and it makes easy to 
control the wheel shape.  
II. WHEEL PATTERN DESIGN 
The origami pattern for the wheel was made by using a 
well-known origami pattern, the magic ball pattern. To use 
this design to make a wheel, a specially designed magic ball 
pattern with added spokes was devised. Because of its 
structural characteristics, the whole structure can be changed 
by actuating only a small portion of the wheel. 
III. FABRICATION OF WHEEL STRUCTURE 
For wheel fabrication, a pattern embedded fabric was 
designed to make a robust but foldable structure. This 
structure is composed of fabric, adhesive layer, and P.V.C. 
segments. The P.V.C segments are enclosed with fabric and 
the stitches are sewn around them, so it is possible to achieve 
tough and foldable structure. Additionally, because of the 
 
*Resrach supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) 
(No. 2012-0000348) and the Asian Office of Aerospace Research and 
Development (AOARD) (No. FA2386-13-1-4019). 
D. Lee, J. Kim, J. Park, S. Kim are with School of Mechanical and 
Aerospace Engineering, Seoul National University, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, 
Seoul 151-742, Korea  (e-mail: winter2nf@gmail. com; 
rubagi05@gmail.com; pjunyyy@hanmail.com; sareumkim1@gmail.com ) 
K. Cho is with School of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Seoul 
National University, Gwanak-ro, Gwanak-gu, Seoul 151-742, Korea (phone: 
+82-2-880-1663; fax: +82-2-880-1663; e-mail: kjcho@snu.ac.kr) 
tough skin of the wheel, it is possible to attach steel hooks on 
the skin, and it highly increases the robot’s climbing ability. 
IV. DEFORMATION MECHANISM DESIGN 
The wheel deformation mechanism was composed of a 
D.C. geared motor, sliding shaft and cable. When the motor 
pulls the wire, the wheel diameter becomes larger. Also there 
is a rubber band around the wheel, so the wheel returns to the 
original shape when the motor unwinds the wire. The total 
weight of the robot is about 470 g and the wheel diameter can 
deform from 55 mm to 120 mm (with the hook). The 
maximum speed of the robot is about 0.3 m/s 
V. CONCLUSION 
Using the fabrication method and the mechanisms 
presented in this paper, the origami wheel robot was made as 
shown in Fig. 1. The fabric provides enough toughness as a 
wheel in both deformed and undeformed states, and the geared 
DC motor enables fast and robust deformation of the wheel. In 
future work, quantitative analysis of deformation will be 
conducted and various materials will be utilized for robust and 
foldable structures.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Dureisseix, “An Overview of Mechanisms and Patterns with 
Origami”, International Journal of Space Structures, Vol. 27, No. 1, pp 
1–14, 2012. 
[2] Dae-Young Lee, Gwang-Pil Jung, Min-Ki. Sin, Sung-Hoon Ahn and 
Kyu-Jin Cho, "Deformable Wheel Robot Based on Origami Structure," 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA), pp. 5592-5597, 2013 
[3] Dae-Young Lee, Ji-Suk Kim, Sa-Reum Kim, Je-Sung Koh, Kyu-Jin 
Cho, “The Deformable Wheel Robot using Magic-Ball Origami 
Structure”, Proceedings of the ASME 2013 IDETC/CIE. 
Fabrication of Origami Wheel using Pattern Embedded Fabric           
and its Application to a Deformable Mobile Robot 
Dae-Young Lee, Ji-Suk Kim, Jae-Jun Park, Sa-Reum Kim and Kyu-Jin Cho, Member, IEEE 
 
Figure 1.  Origami Wheel Robot. 
 
 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2565
