  
? 
Abstract— This paper introduces an optical based three axis 
force sensor which can be integrated with the robot arm of the 
EU project STIFF-FLOP (STIFFness controllable Flexible and 
Learnable Manipulator for Surgical Operations) in order to 
measure applied external forces. The structure of the 
STIFF-FLOP arm is free of metal components and electric 
circuits and, hence, is inherently safe near patients during 
surgical operations. In addition, this feature makes the 
performance of this sensing system immune against strong 
magnetic fields inside magnetic resonance (MR) imaging 
scanners. The hollow structure of the sensor allows the 
implementation of distributed actuation and sensing along the 
body of the manipulator. In this paper, we describe the design 
and calibration procedure of the proposed three axis 
optics-based force sensor. The experimental results confirm the 
effectiveness of our optical sensing approach and its 
applicability to determine the force and momentum components 
during the physical interaction of the robot arm with its 
environment. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Using Robot Technology, minimally invasive surgery 
(MIS) has considerably advanced over the last few decades. 
Recently, robotic surgical devices such as da Vinci surgery 
system take advantages of cutting edge robot technology 
leading to tremendous advancement in stable and safe MIS. 
Such surgical devices enable doctors to perform surgical 
operation precisely making use of the feedback from vision 
systems - 3D surgical cameras are employed enhancing the 
doctors’ performance during complex surgery in confined 
spaces. Employing these stable, tremor-free and intuitive 
surgical systems, operations are tremendously simplified 
when compared to standard laparoscopy [1-2]. 
However, due to their rigid structure and the low degrees of 
freedom, such medical devices require a large motion 
workspace to perform surgical operations. These devices have 
limited ability to pass and maneuver inside small openings and 
confined spaces. Moreover, they do not use tactile and force 
 
Manuscript received Feb 15th, 2014. The research leading to these results has 
received funding from the European Commission’s Seventh Framework 
Programme; project STIFF-FLOP (Grant No: 287728). 
Yohan Noh, Sina Sareh, Jungwhan Back, Wü rdemann Helge, Emanuele 
Lindo Secco, Angela Faragasso, Hongbin Liu, and Kaspar Althoefer are with 
Centre of Robotics Research, King’s College London, School of Natural and 
Mathematical Sciences, Department of Informatics, UK (e-mail corresponding 
author: yohan.noh@kcl.ac.uk). 
 Tommaso Ranzani is with Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, The BioRobotics 
Institute, Italy 
 
sensors, and therefore are not able to protect delicate internal 
organs. As a result, these robotic systems can cause patients to 
be in a critical condition during or after the operation.  
In order to overcome the shortcomings of the conventional, 
rigid medical devices, researchers have started to develop 
flexible manipulators. Taylor et al. developed a flexible 
snake-like manipulator that can demonstrate high degrees of 
actuation dexterity in confined spaces [3-4]. However this 
device is not capable of changing its stiffness.  Simaan et al. 
also proposed a dexterous, flexible manipulator, which can 
articulate into complex shapes [5-6]. Active cannulas 
manipulators by Webster et al. are a new class of thin, 
dexterous continuum robots that can access narrow openings 
such as the throat and lung [7-8]. Cheng et al. developed a 
flexible manipulator, which can change its stiffness and is 
capable of dexterous precise motion control using cables [9]. 
Another flexible and stiffness-controllable robot concept was 
introduced by Jiang et al. [10-11]. However, the above 
manipulators are not equipped with any tactile/force sensors 
inside or outside of the manipulator structure and, thus, 
A Three-Axial Body Force Sensor for Flexible Manipulators 
Yohan Noh, Sina Sareh, Jungwhan Back, Helge A Wü rdemann, Tommaso Ranzani, Emanuele Lindo 
Secco, Angela Faragasso, Hongbin Liu, IEEE Member, Kaspar Althoefer, IEEE Member  
 
Figure 1. Overview of the STIFF-FLOP manipulator and three axis 
sensor 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6388
  
cannot provide force feedback to the surgeon. 
For these reasons, we have been developing a multi-DoF 
force sensor for the arm of the EU-project STIFF-FLOP, in 
collaboration with 11 European academic partners 
(www.stiff-flop.eu) [12-14]. The STIFF-FLOP arm is a soft 
robotic arm that can squeeze through standard MIS trocar 
ports enabling precise closed-loop motion control of the arm, 
i.e. omni-elongation and bending of the arm using air 
pressure feedback and bending sensors [15] (a sketch of the 
arm is shown in Fig 1). In addition, the stiffness of the arm 
can be adjusted at various regions along its length through 
granular jamming [10-11]. This provides opportunities to 
perform compliant force control tasks using force and tactile 
sensors while the robot is moving through the abdominal 
environment of a patient. Moreover, due to the lack of metal 
components and electric circuits in the structure of the 
STIFF-FLOP arm, the surgical operation can be potentially 
carried out employing intra-operative MRI (Magnetic 
Resonance Imaging). 
Conventional multi axial force sensors usually employ 
strain gauges driven by electrical circuitry and are made of 
metal components. The application of this class of sensors 
makes the robotic system vulnerable to magnetic or electrical 
fields. Also, these sensors usually do not have a hollow 
structure and, thus, prevent the passing through of cables and 
tubes that may be needed for a fully-functional surgical 
device. Often the standard force sensors do not conform to the 
geometry of the STIFF-FLOP arm. Hence, to enable 
embodiment of the multi-axis force sensor along with other 
actuation and sensing components, and to preserve unique 
advantages of the STIFF-FLOP arm including MR 
compatibility, a new sensor approach was explored here.  
To tackle the aforementioned limitations, we take 
advantage of a fiber optic sensing approach [16-19], which is 
inherently safe and well-suited to be accompanied with 
intra-operative imaging systems [18]. Here, a ring-shaped 
multi-axis force sensor, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2, is designed 
and implemented allowing actuation and sensing components 
of the arm to pass through from the base of robot to its tip, 
including the pipes for the fluidic actuation chambers to pass 
between successive segments of the manipulator.  
In this paper, we present the design and development of an 
optical based three axis force sensor which can measure 
applied forces. In the following text, we explain the design, 
calibration, and calculation of the force components of the 
sensor. Finally, from the result of the experiments, we verify 
our proposed methods.  
II. DESIGN METHODS AND FABRICATION 
A. Design Concept 
The design concept of the multi axial force sensor should 
satisfy several conditions as follows:  
1) The sensor employs optical fiber technology to be 
immune against magnetic and electric fields. Also, our 
approach eliminates possible damage to the patients due to 
electric currents. 
2) This sensor devices will also serve as connecting 
element between segments of the STIFF-FLOP manipulator 
and, hence, should have a ring-like structure to conform to the 
shape of the manipulator. A hollow section in the central 
region of the sensor should be provided to allow auxiliary 
pipes and cables to pass through. 
3) The sensor should be capable of measuring three 
components of external force and moments including F
z
, M
x
, 
and M
y
 in order to determine relevant interactions with the 
environment. Note that, the STIFF-FLOP manipulator has 3 
DoF including two omni-directional bending motions and an 
elongation motion. 
B. Configuration of Optical Multi Axial Force Sensor 
The structure of optical three axis force sensor is shown in 
Figs. 1 and 2. The sensor uses quarter millimeter thick optical 
fibers SH1001-1.0 from LasIRvis Co. Ltd, mirrors as 
reflective surfaces, and a flexible ring-like structure to 
x
y
z
Air pressure pipe 
for fluidic chamber 
Optical fibre
for three axis force sensor
Optical fiber
for bending sensor
Three axis force sensor
STIFF-FLOP manipulator
 
Figure 2. The three axis sensor and the click-on mechanism to connect 
with the STIFF-FLOP manipulator  
 
z
?1
x
O
y
?3
z
x
y
Mx
Fz
My
Mx
Fz
My
?2
Upper plate 
Bottom plate 
Upper plate 
Bottom plate 
Cantilever arm 
Cantilever arm 
      
Figure 3. Equivalent spring model of the flexible tripod platform 
x
y
z
10N
Figure 4. FEM Simulation performed with the Solidworks Simulation tool 
 
 
6389
  
measure a force component F
z
 and two moment components, 
M
x
 and M
y
. In order to measure these three force and moment 
components, at least three deformations of the sensor’s 
structure need to be measured, as illustrated in Fig. 3  
The sensor makes use of a pair of optical fibers, one of 
them used for emitting the light and the other one for the 
receiving the light [16-19]. Fibers are arranged at a specific 
angle with respect to each other, as shown in Fig. 1, and are 
connected to FS-N11MN Fiber Optic Sensor, by Keyence 
Co., Ltd. The Keyence optic sensor has two light channels, 
one for emitting and for receiving light. The device works 
both as a light source and receiver of the reflected light, and 
eventually converts the amount of reflective light into voltage. 
When an external force is applied on the upper plate, three 
cantilever beams will be deformed as shown in Fig. 3. The 
three pairs of optical fibers can measure deformations ?
1
, ?
2
, 
and, ?
3
 on the three points between the upper plate and the 
bottom plate as shown in Fig. 3. In order to anchor the force 
sensor to the structure of the STIFF-FLOP manipulator, a 
click-on mechanism is adopted, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2. 
The ring-like, hollow sensor structure allows passing optical 
fibers between the arm segments and connecting them to the 
force sensor. 
C. Sensor Structure Design and Simulation 
To measure the force/moment components, three 
cantilever beams are used as shown in Fig. 3. To satisfy the 
force range requirements of the STIFF-FLOP manipulator 
(0-10 N), we have performed an FEM analysis. Fig. 4 shows 
the result of the FEM simulation by using the SolidWorks 
Simulation tool, revealing that the sensor can measure the 
force within the required range. The material property values 
in this simulation were set at: tensile modulus of 1283 MPa, 
mass density of 1020 kg/m
3
, yield strength of 42500000 
N/m
2
; these assumptions were based on information provided 
by PROJET VisiJet
? R
 EX200, 3D SYSTEM Co., Ltd.  
D. Optimization of Deployment of Optical Fibers 
In order to develop an optical based force sensor, the 
following key points should be considered: (1) a small 
deformation resulting from an external force should produce 
a sufficiently large value for the output voltage of the fiber 
optic sensor; (2) the output voltage of the fiber optic sensor 
should change linearly with respect to distance between 
optical fibers and the mirror, to lead to a linear relationship 
between physical force and output voltage of the optical fiber.   
However, depending on the distance from the mirror to the 
tips of the fibers, the orientation angle between two optical 
fibers a, and the depth d between them, the characteristic 
curve between the output voltage of the optical fiber and the 
distance was found to be different (Fig. 5). For this reason, in 
order to satisfy the two key points for the development of the 
optical force sensor, a device is proposed to optimize the 
measured voltage values against the corresponding actual 
parameters, including depth d and angle a. Using this device, 
the optimized angle between the two optical fibers has been 
determined as follows: 
1)  Experiment for Optimization of Deployment of Optical Fiber 
1.1) Device Design 
The device consists of a mirror, a linear guide, an actuator, 
and a rotational unit, which can adjust an amount of angle and 
distance between the two optical fibers as shown in Fig. 6. 
The actuator moves in a translational direction along the 
linear guide and the characteristic curve is obtained as shown 
in Figs. 7, 8 and 9. The characteristic curve shows how much 
the measured optical fiber voltages change with respect to 
distance. This device, ADC (Analog to Digital Convertor), 
and software can obtain characteristic curves between output 
voltage of the optical fiber and distance (actuator’s encoder 
data). 
1.2) Setup for Experiments   
The angle between an optical fiber pair and the distance 
between their tips and the mirror are adjusted as shown in Fig. 
6: this is achieved by changing angle a and depth d, namely 
the distance between the mirror and the two optical fibers 
along the linear guide using DC motor.    
As shown in Figs. 5 and 6, the distal part of the two optical 
fibers was adjusted to be 6.5 mm away from the mirror. Then, 
a profile of different angles a (0?, 15?, and 30?) and different 
depths d (1, 2, 3) were tested while the distance between the 
fibers and the mirror were modulated from 0 mm to 6 mm 
along the linear guide, Figs. 5 and 6. In this way, the 
characteristic curve between the output voltage of the optical 
fiber and the distance between the mirror and the two optical 
fibers was obtained.          
Optical fibre
Mirror
Optical fibre
Mirror
d a
x
y
x
y
Distance = 0 [mm]
Distance = 6.0 [mm]
O O
 
Figure 5. Experiment setup of the optical fibres 
Mirror
y
z
Linear guide
Rotational unit 
Figu
re 6. Configuration of the device for the optimization of the fibers’ 
configuration  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6390
  
1.3) Experimental Results   
Fig. 7 shows profiles of output voltage versus the distance 
to the mirror when a = 0?, and at three different depths d. It 
can be seen that in the vicinity of the mirror, the output 
voltage of the optical fiber suddenly changes from 1 V to 5 V. 
For smaller values of depth d, the output voltage of the optical 
fiber demonstrated a sharp nearly linear change in the vicinity 
of the mirror, and so the linearity was improved. As shown in 
Figs. 8 and 9, in case of adjusting angles a, depths d, the 
output voltage of the optical fiber changes from 1 to 5 V. The 
smaller depths d accompanied with bigger values of angles a 
result in a better linearity of the voltage-distance profile. Note 
that in Fig. 9, the voltage change was not observed at around 
6 mm away from the mirror, since the output voltage of the 
two optical fibers was in the saturated region. 
1.4) Discussion on the Experiments 
From the results of the experiments, the design of the three 
axis sensor can be attempted. In order to satisfy the three 
conditions of the force sensor development, the characteristic 
curve d = 1 and a = 15? (orange curve) can be used as shown 
in Fig. 8 providing sufficient linearity and producing a 4 V 
change in response to 0.5 mm distance change. Although the 
other curves also potentially provide good possibilities for the 
design, their characteristic curves are highly non-linear, and 
are too steep with respect to tiny distances, causing the output 
voltage to be saturated easily. 
III.  SENSOR CALIBRATION 
A. Sensor Calibration 
In order to use a self-fabricated sensor prototype as a force 
sensor, calibration is required. The calibration process aims at 
obtaining a relationship between the output voltages of the 
optical fiber and physical force F
z 
and physical moments M
x 
and M
y
. For this reason, we propose a calibration device and 
calculated coefficients of linear fitting function for a proper 
prediction of the applied force and momentum components 
from the calibration data. 
1) Calibration Device 
The calibration device consists of a base, a sensor fixture, 
and a load fixture. For the calibration, the developed three 
axis force sensor was attached to the calibration device as 
shown in Fig. 10. For F
z 
calibration, the load fixture is 
attached to the sensor fixture as shown in the same figure, 
whereas in the cases of M
x
 and M
y
 calibration, another type of 
load was attached on the sensor fixture as shown in Figs. 11 
and 12. This calibration device also uses an Analogue-Digital 
Converter (ADC) and its associated software to obtain the 
characteristic curves between the output voltage of the optical 
fibers and the physical load. 
2) Calibration for Force Components 
As shown in Fig. 10, loads - in the range from 0 N to 7 N - 
were attached to the load fixture, and the characteristic curve 
between the loads F
z
 and the output voltage of the force 
sensor were obtained. The loads lead to output voltages for 
the three optical fibers in the region of 2.5 V, in Fig. 13.  It is 
noted that the three characteristic curves are not completely 
linear. 
Referring to the moment calibration in Fig. 11, loads from 
0 Ncm to 3.5 Ncm were attached to the load fixture, and the 
characteristic curves between the loads M
x
 and the output 
voltage of the three optical fibers were obtained. The loads 
lead to fiber output voltages as shown in Fig. 14. Even in this 
case, the characteristic curves are not completely linear.  
Similarly, in Fig. 12, loads from 0 Ncm to 3.5 Ncm were 
attached to the load fixture, and the characteristic curve 
between the loads M
y
 and the output voltage from the three 
optical fibers were computed (Fig. 15). As it is shown, the 
characteristic curves are not perfectly linear. 
d = 0 mm
d = 1 mm
d = 2 mm
a = 0 deg
 
Figure 7. Characteristic curve of output voltage of optical fiber in case of     
 a = 0?and changing d  
d = 0 mm
d = 1 mm
d = 2 mm
d = 3 mm
a = 15 deg
 
Figure 8. Characteristic curve of output voltage of optical fiber in case of     
a = 15?and changing d 
d = 0 mm
d = 1 mm
d = 2 mm
d = 3 mm
a = 30 deg
 
 
Figure 9. Characteristic curve of output voltage of optical fiber in case of  
a = 30?and changing d  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6391
  
B. Calculation of Force Components
 
by Multiple Linear Regression 
Multiple linear regression aims at finding the relationship 
between two or more variables and a response variable by 
means of fitting a linear equation to the observed data [20]. In 
this implementation, every value of an independent variable - 
namely each value of the three output voltage of the optical 
fibers - is associated with values of the dependent variables - 
namely the force F
z
, and the moments M
x
, and  M
y
. 
By applying the multiple linear regression, F
z
, M
x
 and M
y
 
can be calculated from the three sensor voltage samples V
1
, 
V
2
, and V
3
, as shown in Eq. (1) to (3). According to this 
calculation, the estimated F
z
, M
x
 and M
y
 differ from the real F
z
, 
M
x
, and M
y
, as shown in Fig. 16 to 18. Particularly, M
x
 has 
some error when compared with the other errors of F
z
 and M
y
 
(Fig. 17 and Table 1): 
 
Fz =  -0.103V
1
 + 1.724V
2
 + 3.836V
3
                   (1)               
Mx= -31.807V
1
 - 4.670V
2
 + 67.319V
3
       (2)                    
    My= -2.516V
1
 - 0.949V
2
 + 0.849V
3
            (3)      
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS  
In this paper, we have presented details of an optical based 
three axis force sensor used to measure external forces applied 
to the STIFF-FLOP manipulator. We have demonstrated how 
to design a sensor structure which enables multi axis sensing 
in a multi-segment soft manipulator and optimized the 
deployment (relative orientation) of the two optical fibers in 
order to obtain maximum sensing range. In addition, we 
proposed how to calibrate the sensor and calculate the force 
components of the sensor to estimate the applied force and 
momentum components employing multiple linear regression. 
Finally, we have also validated the effectiveness of our 
 
Figure 13. Characteristic curve between the loads F
z
, and the output 
voltage of the force sensor 
 
Figure 14. Characteristic curve between the loads M
x
, and the output 
voltage of the force sensor           
    
Figure 15. Characteristic curve between the loads M
y
, and the output 
voltage of the force sensor      
 
 
 
 
TABLE I. SENSOR ERROR PROPERTY 
Force / Moment Range Maximum error 
Fz +/- 6 [N] 0.255 [N]   (2.1%) 
Mx +/- 3.5 [Ncm] 0.996 [Ncm]  (14.2% ) 
My +/- 2.5 [Ncm] 0.216 [Ncm]  (3.0%) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
z
x
y
z
x
y
Load fixture
sensor fixture
base
Three axis 
Force sensor
Three axis 
Force sensor
Load
 
Figure 10. Experimental set-up for the calibration of F
z
  
x
y
  
Figure 11. Calibration method for M
x
  
x
y
  
Figure 12. Experimental set-up for the calibration of M
y
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6392
  
proposed three axis force sensor through a set of experiments.  
As a future task, the deployment of pairs of optical fibers 
should be optimized to achieve higher sensor linearity (to 
reduce the sensor error as shown in Table 1), and to evaluate 
and improve sensor characteristics such as error, nonlinearity, 
crosstalk, repeatability, and hysteresis. In addition, our 
proposed three axis force sensor will be integrated within the 
STIFF-FLOP manipulator in order to measure external force 
and momentum components. As the hysteresis level of the 
multi-axis sensor proposed in this study is high, we aim to use 
MRI compatible metals such as titanium, aluminium for future 
sensors, instead of the currently used ABS plastic.   
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Reynolds, “The First Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy”, JSLS 5:89- 
94, 2001. 
[2] A. Rané, G. Y. Tan, and A. K. Tewari, “Laparoendoscopic single-site 
surgery in urology: is robotics the missing link?”, BJU International, 
2009; pp. 1041–1043. 
[3] N. Simaan, K. Xu, A. Kapoor, W. Wei, P. Kazanzides, P. Flint, and R. 
Taylor, "A System for Minimally Invasive Surgery in the Throat and 
Upper Airways", Int. J. Robotics Research (special issue on medical 
robotics), vol. 28- 9, pp. 1134-1153, June 2009. 
[4] Alexander T. Hillel, Ankur Kapoor, Nabil Simaan, Russell H. Taylor 
and Paul Flint, " Applications of Robotics for Laryngeal Surgery," 
Laryngeal Cancer -Otolaryngologic Clinics of North America, Nasir 
Bhatti & Ralph P. Tufano Eds., Volume 41, Issue 4, Pages 781-791, 
August 2008. 
[5] Zhang, J., Bhattacharyya, S., Simaan, N., “Model and Parameter 
Identification of Friction During Robotic Insertion of Cochlear-Implant 
Electrode Arrays,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Automation (ICRA’2009), pp. 3859-3864, 2009. 
[6] Zhang, J., Wei, W., Roland, J., Manolidis, S., Simaan, N., “Optimal 
Path Planning for Robotic Insertion of Steerable Electrode Arrays in 
Cochlear Implant Surgery”, in ASME Journal on Medical Devices, Vol 
3., No. 1, pp. 011001, 2009. 
[7] D. C. Rucker, B. A. Jones, and R. J. Webster III. A Geometrically Exact 
Model for Externally Loaded Concentric Tube Continuum Robots. 
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 26(5), 769-780, 2010. 
[8] D. C. Rucker, R. J. Webster III, G. S. Chirikjian, and N. J. Cowan. 
Equilibrium Conformations of Concentric-Tube Continuum Robots. 
International Journal of Robotics Research, 29(10), 1263-1280, 2010.   
(Pre-typesetting preprint) Final definitive version available from IJRR. 
[9]  N.G. Cheng,  M.B. Lobovsky,  S.J. Keating, A.M. Setapen, “Design 
and Analysis of a Robust, Low-cost, Highly Articulated manipulator 
enabled by jamming of granular media”, The 2012 IEEE International 
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4328 – 4333, 
2012 
[10] A Jiang, G Xynogalas, P Dasgupta, K Althoefer, T 
Nanayakkara,”Design of a variable stiffness flexible manipulator with 
composite granular jamming and membrane coupling”, 2012 IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 
2012), pp. 2922 – 2927, 2012 
[11] A Jiang, A Ataollahi, K Althoefer, P Dasgupta, T Nanayakkara, “A 
Variable Stiffness Joint by Granular Jamming”, Proceedings of the 
ASME 2012 International Design Engineering Technical Conference & 
Computers and Information in Engineering Conference (IDETC 2012) 
[12] Tommaso Ranzani, Matteo Cianchetti, Giada Gerboni, Iris De Falco, 
Gianluigi Petroni, Arianna Menciassi,” A modular soft manipulator 
with variable stiffness,” 3rd Joint Workshop on New Technologies for 
Computer/Robot Assisted Surgery Sept 2013, Verona, Italy 
[13] M. Cianchetti, T. Ranzani, G. Gerboni, C. Laschi, A. Menciassi,” 
Preliminary mechanical design of a soft manipulator for minimally 
invasive surgery”, 2013 International Workshop on Soft Robotics and 
Morphological Computation  pp. 23, 2013 
[14] Matteo Cianchetti, Tommaso Ranzani, Giada Gerboni, Iris De Falco, 
Cecilia Laschi, Arianna Menciassi,”STIFF-FLOP Surgical 
Manipulator: mechanical design and experimental characterization of 
the single module”, IEEE/RSJ 2013 International Conference on 
Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3576-3581, 2013 
[15] Thomas C. Searle, Kaspar Althoefer, Lakmal Seneviratne, Hongbin 
Liu,” An Optical Curvature Sensor for Flexible Manipulators”, The 
2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation 
(ICRA 2012), pp. 4401 – 4405, 2012 
[16] P Polygerinos, P Puangmali, T Schaeffter, R Razavi, LD Seneviratne,  
“Novel miniature MRI-compatible fiber-optic force sensor for cardiac 
catheterization procedures”, The 2010 IEEE International Conference 
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA 2010), pp. 2598 – 2603, 2010 
[17] P Puangmali, H Liu, LD Seneviratne, P Dasgupta, K Althoefer, 
”Miniature 3-axis distal force sensor for minimally invasive surgical 
palpation”, Mechatronics, IEEE/ASME Transactions on 17 (4), 
646-656 
[18] Panagiotis Polygerinos, Dinusha Zbyszewski, Tobias Schaeffter, Reza 
Razavi, Lakmal D Seneviratne, Kaspar Althoefer,” MRI-compatible 
fiber-optic force sensors for catheterization procedures”, IEEE Sensors 
Journal, pp. 1598-1608, 2010 
[19] H. Liu, J. Li, X. Song, L. D. Seneviratne, K. Althoefer, ”Rolling 
indentation probe for tissue abnormality identification during 
minimally invasive surgery”, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 27(3), 
450-460, 2011  
[20] Laura L. Nathans, Frederick L. Oswald, Kim Nimon, “Interpreting 
Multiple Linear Regression: A Guidebook of Variable Importance”, 
Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, Vol. 17, No. 9 
 
Figure 16. Comparison between real values and linear regression 
estimation of F
z 
 
 
Figure 17. Comparison between real values and linear regression 
estimation of M
x
 
 
Figure 18. Comparison between real values and linear regression 
estimation of M
y
 
 
6393
