Coordinating UA Vs and AUVs for Oceanographic Field Experiments:
Challenges and Lessons Learned
Margarida Faria
1
, Jos´ e Pinto
1
, Fr´ ed´ eric Py
2
, Jo˜ ao Fortuna
1
, Hugo Dias
1
, Ricardo Martins
1
Frederik Leira
3
, Tor Arne Johansen
3
, Jo˜ ao Sousa
1
and Kanna Rajan
2
Abstract—Obtaining synoptic observations of dynamic
ocean phenomena such as fronts, eddies, oxygen minimum
zones and blooms has been challenging primarily due to
thelargespatialscalesinvolved.Traditionalmethodsofob-
servation with manned ships are expensive and, unless the
vessel can survey at high-speed, unrealistic. Autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) are robotic platforms that
havebeenmakingsteadygainsinsamplingcapabilitiesand
impacting oceanographic observations especially in coastal
areas. However, their reach is still limited by operating
constraints related to their energy sources. Unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs) recently introduced in coastal and
polar oceanographic experiments have added to the mix in
observation strategy and methods. They offer a tantalizing
opportunity to bridge such scales in operational oceanog-
raphy by coordinating with AUVs in the water-column
to get in-situ measurements. In this paper, we articulate
the principal challenges in operating UAVs with AUVs
making synoptic observations for such targeted water-
column sampling. We do so in the context of autonomous
control and operation for networked robotics and describe
novelexperimentswhilearticulatingthekeychallengesand
lessons learned.
I. INTRODUCTION
Sampling of the coastal ocean is substantially chal-
lenging, even at small observation scales. The state of
the art entails deploying sensors distributed over buoys,
unmanned marine vehicles, manned vehicles and adapt-
ing the sampling strategy to the observations. Adaptation
is targeted at adjusting the spatial and temporal reso-
lutions to the properties of the sampled ﬁeld. This is
not a trivial task. First, observations need to be commu-
nicated over communication challenged environments.
Second, data once obtained requires assimilation that is
computationally challenging as even prediction models
do not fully capture domain knowledge from an expert.
Third different sensors and vehicles may have different
command and data interfaces making interoperability
quite difﬁcult. And ﬁnally, state of the art unmanned
vehicles while automated, lack inferential reasoning
capabilities, thus requiring human guidance for effective
adaptation. These are some of the reasons why there is
1
M. Faria, J. Pinto, J. Fortuna, H. Dias, R. Martins and J.
Sousa are with the Faculty of Engineering, Porto University, Portugal
fmargaridacf,zepinto,jtassog@fe.up.pt
2
F. Py and K. Rajan are with the Mon-
terey Bay Aquarium Research Institute, California
ffpy,kanna.rajang@mbari.org
3
F. Leira and T. Johansen are with the Center for Au-
tonomous Marine Operations and Systems (AMOS), Depart-
ment of Engineering Cybernetics, Norwegian University of Sci-
ence and Technology, Trondheim ffrederik.s.leira,
tor.arne.johanseng@itk.ntnu.no
Fig. 1. Conducting UA V and AUV operations from the Portuguese
Navy support vessel NRP Bacamarte, Sesimbra, Portugal, July 2013.
a signiﬁcant gap between operational deployments and
simulation studies.
Autonomous platforms such as powered autonomous
underwater vehicles (AUVs) or slower moving glid-
ers have extended the reach of traditional ship-board
methods for obtaining oceanographic measurements. As
a consequence, scientists are able to characterize a
wider swath of a survey area in less time. Yet, such
measurements are not synoptic since they do not match
the mesoscale (> 50km
2
) observation capability nec-
essary to understand the bio-geochemistry and organ-
ism transport important for science, one example are
coastal ecological studies. Coupled with limited ocean
model quality, the capability to understand our changing
ocean is called into question. With recent advances
in unmanned aerial vehicles (UA Vs), payload sensors,
and their cost-effectiveness in ﬁeld operations, these
platforms offer a tantalizing hope of further extending
the reach of oceanographers.
The paper describes the necessary infrastructure and
software architecture to operate networked vehicles at
sea. Operations are supported by the use of mixed-
initiative control, a novelty in our ﬁeld. As a ﬁrst,
we detail the use of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) based
control to command both a UA V from the ground and
an AUV onboard. The paper describes the results of a
ﬁeld experiment which used the architecture at sea from
a support vessel. We conclude with lessons learned and
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6606
future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Coordinating AUVs and UA Vs vehicles in oceanic
conditions has proved to be challenging. While vehicle-
speciﬁc commercial solutions with proven ﬁeld capabili-
ties are in routine use especially within the military, they
rely on mature waypoint-based command and control
techniques.
Demonstrated applications with autonomous vehicles
in realms spanning from civil engineering [1], agri-
culture [2], oceanography [3] and others [4] exist. A
control law for cooperation between UA Vs and terrestrial
robots for large area coverage is described in [5]. These
approaches use limited forms of autonomy which is
prone to human errors since missions are deﬁned in low-
level behavior patterns.
The use of deliberative AI methods is less common,
however. A number of different approaches for multi-
vehicle task assignment in ﬁeld operations have been
attempted. Extensive work has been done by [6] devel-
oping a human readable Mission Speciﬁcation Language
based on Temporal Action Logic. In his delegation-
based framework, an operator can specify behavior
through high level goals that get distributed among
agents. A partial order planner is then used to search
for task assignment among UA Vs, while an onboard
forward-chaining planner generates actions for the agent
in temporal order. A hierarchical 3-tier architecture has
been developed and tested by [7]. It uses a collision
avoidance layer at lower abstraction levels, a middle
layer for path planning and an abstract layer for task
assignment. This is where the optimal task scheduling
is determined and allocated, it relies on a negotiation
based algorithm for task distribution. The architecture
developed by [8] has an on-board deliberative layer for
distributed decision-making and an executive layer for
task execution. Task planning can be done online or
ofﬂine using a temporal planner that solves instances
of the Travelling Salesman Problem using a brute-force
method. The distribution of tasks among UA Vs is then
done using a market-based approach that does load-
balancing across UA Vs.
The approach described here builds on the work by
[9]. These authors use an onboard planer to generate
and execute Lagrangian survey plans around a moving
drifter with an AUV .
In most of these instances, the system was designed
and tested for a single vehicle type. Network and control
of a heterogeneous group of vehicles has proven to be
difﬁcult especially in the ﬁeld and we believe we are
among the ﬁrst to address it here.
III. ARCHITECTURAL APPROACH
To overcome the challenge of adjusting to both the
faster, short lasting UA V and the slower, longer lasting
AUV we used the ﬂexible network setup shown in Fig.
2. Operators are onboard a support vessel, interacting
with the overall system via NEPTUS consoles. These
are connected to a Manta communications gateway
which provides long-range wiﬁ, underwater (acoustic),
satellite (Iridium) communications and internet access
via 3G, when available. The consoles receive the state
of all systems in the network, those connected directly
to nearby Manta gateway as well as systems in remote
locations. When removed from a gateway, the system
sends its position to a central service through 3G/GSM
or satellite. Execution of a plan is carried out by DUNE,
deliberation of the plan isT-REX’s responsibility, while
plan selection is in the hands of the human controller
operating NEPTUS.
a) Communications: To cope with hardware het-
erogeneity we use Inter-Module Communications
1
(IMC) [10], a real-time message-based protocol that is
used across all systems including unmanned vehicles,
operator consoles, Manta and back-end servers. Typi-
cally, all IMC-compatible nodes use a discovery mech-
anism to disseminate available services to the network
and, after discovery, communicate peer-to-peer.
During execution, all hardware nodes store incoming
and outgoing messages by serializing them into a log
ﬁle, for posterior mission analysis. The common format
allows merging of different missions for a more inte-
grated view of the data.
b) Web services: A centralization point, the HUB
web service receives information from any source with a
web, satellite or GSM connection. Data such as oceano-
graphic conditions, vehicle or ship locations need to be
parsed, integrated and made available through an API
toNEPTUS and other applications. TheHUB can in turn
send data out through either satellite links or the web.
Consequently, teams at remote locations and without di-
rect wiﬁ connection can coordinate positions of different
vehicles using the HUB as a relay while exchanging
“virtual positions” (a desired position is requested by
one team and updated by another). Not only can all
teams see requests and updates, but they can use multiple
pathways to receive the same information, leading to a
robust and reliable communication mechanism.
c) DUNE: The Uniform Navigation Environment
(DUNE)
2
[11] is the embedded software used onboard
Spot Iridium Hub Iridium 
provider Wavy Drifter SMS Wifi GSM Satellite 3G/4G Accustic IMC IMC Ship Neptus IMC Manta AUV SMS Internet IMC GPS 
Tracker Android 
phone UAV Fig. 2. Network connectivity across platforms.
1
https://github.com/LSTS/imc
2
https://github.com/LSTS/dune
6607
our unmanned vehicles, data loggers and MANTA gate-
ways. It is composed of independent tasks that com-
municate by broadcasting and subscribing to IMC mes-
sages. DUNE tasks can be diverse; some are responsible
for interfacing hardware with IMC (either sensors or
actuators), others are part of the chain of command either
translating higher-level goals into low-level actuation
commands or interpreting low-level sensor readings into
state estimates. To integrate any sensor or actuator
hardware, only the tasks dedicated to its management
need to know the speciﬁc details. Each system uses
a task conﬁguration adjusted to its purpose, available
sensors, actuators and communications.
The DUNE control architecture requires that a single
maneuver controller is driving the vehicle at any given
instant. To achieve complex behavior, a plan supervisor
is capable of parsing a (scripted) plan and instantiating
maneuver controllers according to that speciﬁcation. Al-
ternatively, external controllers like T-REX (described
below) guide the vehicle by instantiating the FollowRef-
erence maneuver controller. When this controller is
active, it accepts references with the desired state from
authorized sources and transforms them into vehicle
actions. The desired state has elements like coordinates,
altitude/depth or speed.
d) NEPTUS: is an open-source software infrastruc-
ture
3
used to build graphical interfaces for networked
vehicle systems. The main user interfaces are the Oper-
ator Console and the Mission Revision and Analysis tool
[11]. Fig. 3 is an example of an AUV operator console,
consisting of a set of plug-ins such as visual widgets (a
map, a mission tree, a vehicle state display), map layers
(cartography, live ship positions), daemons (operational
limits monitor), popups (multi-system listing) and map
interactions (planning, map editing, measuring, real-
time strategy etc. ). Vehicles can be controlled using four
interaction styles: point-and-click to manually execute
a maneuver, scripted plans for subsequent execution,
real-time planning where the user designs a plan local
to NEPTUS that can be edited on the ﬂy and ﬁnally
deliberative planning, an advanced AI-based capability
Fig. 3. Neptus console interface. ’A’ shows GPS trackers, ’B’ the
path of the UA V , ’C’ icons for an UA V in green and an AUV in white,
’D’ for two MANTAs and an AIS marker for the Bacamarte
3
https://github.com/LSTS/neptus
to synthesize, execute and re-plan on the ﬂy.
To improve operator responsiveness and situational
awareness, NEPTUS allows each console to be adapted
to a particular mission, vehicle or operator function. A
mission ﬁle is a conﬁguration that stores all the mission
elements: map features, vehicle conﬁgurations, plans and
checklists. All elements can be edited and shared asIMC
messages.
e) T-REX: is an open source on-board adaptive
control system
4
that integrates AI-based planning and
state estimation in a hybrid executive. The overall sys-
tem is a composition of application speciﬁc functional
components called reactors, interacting with each other
through timelines or state variables. Goals are dispatched
to other reactors down the hierarchy while observations
recording the state of the world are posted up this
hierarchy. Timelines are populated with observations
(temporal predicates) posted by their owner reactors. In
this system, a goal is a projected future observation.
When a reactor receives a goal in a timeline, it will
attempt to decompose it by potentially deliberating over
a series of other (sub)goals and eventually report it as
an observation, in nominal execution. The role of the
T-REX agent then, is to ensure that all the reactors will
be able to interact concurrently so that they are informed
of state evolution that may impact them, have a sufﬁcient
amount of time to synthesize plans and coordinate plan
dispatch across reactor boundaries. Details of T-REX
are beyond the scope of this paper and can be found in
[12], [13], [14].
f) UAVs: Three identical low-cost UA V platforms
(Fig. 1) were deployed and recovered from our support
vessel. Fig. 4 shows the main components of this UA V
platform. The X8 ﬂying wing is an electric vehicle
based on a RC model which holds an ISEE IGEPv2
single board computer runningDUNE. It has a wingspan
of 212 cm, a take-off weight of around 3:5 Kg and
is able to ﬂy up to one hour continuously. It uses
the ArduPilot, an open-source low-cost autopilot. To
integrate it with DUNE a specialized driver task was
created which translates telemetry and guidance com-
mands. The main communication channel is a 5 GHz
wiﬁ with line-of-sight ranges of up to 10 Km. Different
ArduPilot
Servos Sensors
DUNE
IMC Bus
ArduPilot
Driver
Serial-TCP
Other Tasks
Follow
Reference
Neptus
IMC
MavLink
Consoles
Autonomy
T-Rex
IMC
T-Rex
Platform
Agent
Navigator
Europa Agent
Behavior
Europa Agent
Common timelines
Fig. 4. The UA V toolchain used in the experiments.
4
https://code.google.com/p/trex2-agent/
6608
camera conﬁgurations were tested including an IP, a
digital compact camera and an analog Infra-Red camera
(Fig. 5(a)). The Infra-red camera used was a FLIR Tau2
336, connected to an analog sending device working at
1:3 GHz. An analog receiver device was located on the
ground, where the video feed was captured and stored.
The UA V was deployed using a crossbow/catapult
mechanism and can land either on a grass/dirt/asphalt
strip or on a capture net used in conﬁned spaces like ship
decks such as seen in Fig. 1. Regular operations required
one operator who uses NEPTUS and T-REX to control
the vehicle while in autonomous operations mode and a
safety pilot for take-off, landing and emergency manual
control.
g) AUVs: Three AUVs designed at the Univ. of
Porto were deployed, with two simultaneously in the
water at most. These AUVs have  6 hours of oper-
ational capacity when running underwater at 3 knots.
They weigh 20 Kg, have a 15 cm diameter and length
of 180 cm. Each vehicle runs DUNE in its AMD Geode
LX 800 processor with 1024 MB of RAM memory.
It can communicate using Iridium, 802:11 wiﬁ, GSM
and acoustic modems. For navigation it relies on a
Microstrain 3DM-GX3 AHRS and a NavQuest 600
MicroDVL (Doppler Velocity Log). For water column
measurements it uses an RBR XR620 CTD. The vehicle
is deployed and recovered manually, either from the side
of a ship (Fig. 1) or from a RHIB.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Our ﬁeld experiments were conducted off Sesim-
bra, Portugal from July 8th to July 17th onboard the
Portuguese Navy vessel NRP Bacamarte. During this
experiment, cameras onboard UA Vs were used to detect
features of interest and AUVs were used to provide
contextual information around drifters entrained in these
features. One AUV would sample around a drifter’s
Lagrangian frame of reference [9].
A. UAV ﬂight operation
For the UA Vs to visually conﬁrm a target, like a drifter
in the water, we used a spiral pattern encoded as a num-
ber of increasingly larger circles. Doing so guarantees
that the camera on the UA V will capture footage in an
angle free of the Sun’s specular reﬂection. It covers the
area where the target might have drifted starting from
its last known position. Human operators can task the
UA V to engage this behavior by sending a point on the
console’s map as a target. Since the updated positions
of all the systems are shown on the map, it is simple
to send the desired position to the UA V . As a result
of this interaction, NEPTUS creates a high-level goal
encoded as an IMC message with coordinates, desired
speed and altitude. This message is sent to a shore-
side instance ofT-REX that integrates the objective into
its current sequence of planned UA V manoeuvres using
three reactors: Platform, Navigator and Spotter. The
Platform reactor translates IMC messages into T-REX
observations and vice-versa. This reactor is also respon-
sible for commanding DUNE using guidance messages
sent to the FollowReference maneuver controller. The
Navigator reactor is responsible for enabling the vehicle
to travel from one waypoint to the next adapting the
plan to hardware failures or navigation requirements.
The Spotter reactor (speciﬁc to UA Vs) is responsible for
generating a sequence of circular motions that achieve
the desired search pattern. T-REX reactors are kept
updated withIMC messages about the position and speed
of the vehicle, state of plan execution, operational limits
and connectivity. Only the Spotter reactor knows the
complete plan and issues commands to the Platform
reactor based on the progress of the actions allowing
plan adjustment and to queue of waypoints.
B. AUV under task deliberation
AUV control, deliberation, execution and adaptation
of plans is done onboard using T-REX with a number
of reactors. The Navigator and Platform reactors are
identical to those used in the UA V . The Yoyo reac-
tor generates a set of waypoint references in between
two locations. These references command the vehicle
to change its depth while moving in the direction
of the destination waypoint in a see-saw pattern for
making high-density upper water-column observations.
The Drifter reactor, also speciﬁc to AUV control, is
responsible for generating a survey pattern that makes
the vehicle encircle a drifter in its Lagrangian frame
of reference [9]. The Proxy reactor allows a model to
be distributed over multipleT-REX instances, allowing
a timeline to be synchronized across the network (and
through Iridium) – such an approach allowed us to main-
tain the human operator in control by having her/him
selecting the drifter to be followed.
The generation of the survey pattern is shared between
two reactors. The Drifter generates the horizontal path
solely based on the last known drifter position and
velocity (speed and heading). The generated path is
usually a distorted box centered on the drifter position.
The distortion applied to this box results from applying
the velocity of the drifter to them, thus making the AUV
keep up with expected movement of the drifter. The Yoyo
reactor, generates the vertical references by following
a state machine. Its latency of execution allows it to
function in shallow areas with unknown bathymetry
since it will stop descending as soon as the bottom is
near the vehicle which is detected using Dopple Velocity
Log measurements. The approach described here builds
on the work by [9].
C. Other Operational results
The toolchain consisting of DUNE, NEPTUS, HUB,
T-REX and IMC made it possible to monitor and
control several vehicles, often simultaneously. Gate-
ways, running DUNE were capable of bridging different
communication methods including underwater acoustics,
wiﬁ and the Web (through 3G/HDSPA). NEPTUS con-
soles allowed multiple operators to follow the operation
and control vehicles individually. Additional information
like cartographic maps, real-time ship trafﬁc and meteo-
rological forecasts were overlaid in the consoles, allow-
6609
ing operators and scientists to make accurate predictions
and informed decisions.
An unexpected outcome of the architecture, process
and methods presented here, was the ﬂexibility to dy-
namically target our combined assets towards an op-
portunistic science problem of tracking riverine fronts.
Such fronts often have a steep thermal gradient which
can be detected with an IR camera. Science input from
oceanographers present showed the existence of such
fronts, albeit weak in nature and close to shore. We
used the X8 with the IR camera to map an area in near
proximity to the support vessel and observed a thermal
signature on the video feed suggesting the existence of
such a gradient (Fig. 5(a)). A drifting buoy was then
deployed at this location as a marker for the moving
frontal mass.
A subsequent part of this experiment involved an
AUV executing Lagrangian patterns around the drifting
sensor, since the drifter was now entrained in the front.
Using this method, it was possible to conﬁrm the ex-
istence of frontal zones by comparing the temperature
and salinity gradients of survey yoyo’s. The acquired
data strongly suggested the presence of different bodies
of water (see ﬁgure 5(b)).
Considering the widespread area of operation and the
opportunistic nature of an experiment of this type, the
HUB ’s web services were essential to aggregate infor-
mation from disparate sources with all the associated
diverse input channels.
V. LESSONS LEARNED
We describe the successful deployment of multiple
heterogeneous robotic platforms for coordinated obser-
vation and tracking in the coastal ocean. The experi-
ments were conducted from a support vessel under chal-
lenging conditions, not without failures, including last-
minute procedure changes. The challenges encountered
could be labeled mostly as logistical or operational;
however some key technical issues were also found.
The experiment was part of a larger scale deployment
encompassing tests and scenarios to be executed by the
Portuguese Navy. This was both an advantage and a
challenge; while it brought together people with differ-
ing skills and experience to do opportunistic science, it
also meant multiple objectives had to be satisﬁed with a
limited number of shared robotic assets. One solution
to this problem was to have a tight schedule where
each asset was used for a speciﬁc end; this however
resulted in reduced ﬂexibility for our engineering tests.
Nature too played a part, especially since our UA Vs
relied on stable weather conditions including some wind
lift to ﬂy from the support vessel, impacting coordinated
aerial/sub-surface measurements.
The IMC protocol has been designed so that different
vehicles and consoles can exchange real-time data. How-
ever, due to the simultaneous operations of a number
of vehicles and the available bandwidth, it became
necessary to split the wireless network originating on
the support vessel into two different frequencies, one
operating at 5:8 GHz for the UA V team and the other
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. (a) Aerial infra-red imagery extracted from real-time video
feed showing a riverine front with two distinct bodies of water
indicated by the arrows. (b) Thermal gradient in the CTD data and
the distinct water mass (within the white box) of the AUV survey of
the frontal zone. Black lines indicate the yoyo pattern executed by the
vehicle in the water column.
at 2:4 GHz for the AUV . This isolation lead to loss of
situational awareness as each team only had access to
their own vehicles. With the HUB the position of all the
system became visible supporting team synchronization.
Yet another communication related problem encountered
had to do with the radio transmitter used with the IR
camera, which introduced static noise into the video
feed. A potential solution would be to store the analog
video signal directly on the UA V using a frame grabber.
The large difference in operational speeds for UA Vs,
RHIBS and AUVs showed that it is difﬁcult to re-task a
collective of vehicles unless there is tight human oper-
ator coordination. In future deployments which might
require co-located sampling in aerial and underwater
environments, we believe that using several spatially
distributed AUVs will lead to faster observations to
compensate for their relative speed. However, this would
require a careful balancing of assets’ operating area and
monitoring of resources such as onboard energy.
Deliberative planning onboard AUVs relieves the op-
erator of validating any manually deﬁned plans. How-
ever, we found that having the AUV fully autonomous
makes it difﬁcult for operators to follow the behavior of
an AUV in real-time. Limited observability led to lack
of opacity of what the AUV is doing at any instance of
time. For this reason, we ensured that the operator was
6610
an integral part of the deliberation process. For instance,
in scenarios associated with contextual surveys around
a drifter, the operator console received and plotted all
drifter positions. The operator was therefore situationally
aware and made responsible for selecting which of the
many drifters to target and which tasks and partial plans
were to be sent to the AUV’s onboard planner.
Overall, tolerance to communication faults and redun-
dancy of communication means proved key in this ﬁeld
experiment. In particular, the UA V mitigation scenario
in the event of communication loss (in which the UA V
loiters around a ’safe point’ and altitude) provided
security for bolder tests.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In the context of this experiment, we successfully
demonstrated the integration of deliberative techniques
in T-REX with DUNE with the help of motion-control
command sets based on concepts such as trajectories,
paths, and waypoints. We are now working on tighter
integration and underlying theory development related
to guarantees for safe command execution to ensure
that the planner will not lead to unexpected/unsafe
behaviors. Towards this end, we are investigating the
use of approximations of the vehicle’s reach sets which
are computed off-line [15] and of controllers based on
the interpolation of the grid representation of underlying
value functions [16] to address some of the questions
of integrating different methods within an appropriate
control and computation framework. Further, the integra-
tion of a deliberative on-board planner with a low level
vehicle control system raises several questions at the
intersection of AI and control systems; for instance what
are ’good’ abstractions of low-level controlled behaviors
for planning purposes?
The complete toolchain was used for the very ﬁrst
time in the experiment. Logistical and operational chal-
lenges related to such experimentation in the ﬁeld will
continue to be a signiﬁcant part of such deployments.
However, we have taken preliminary steps to seamlessly
insert humans and fully autonomous systems to control
heterogeneous vehicles in real world environments. And
in this context, the ﬂexibility given by the HUB to inte-
grate information coming from diverse sources proved
to be a valuable asset for situational awareness.
The experiment also supported the possibility for
multiple T-REX instances controlled by a centralized
deliberation engine, which we hope to investigate fur-
ther using such quasi-centralized schemes to decompose
high-level objectives and constraints.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by the Portuguese
Navy. We thank 1st Lt. R´ uben Robalo Rodrigues and 1st
Lt. Cordeiro Cavaleiro. Porto University authors were
funded by ERDF - Transnational Programme - Atlantic
Area (Project NETMAR), and EU FP7 ICT, (Project
Noptilus). MBARI authors were funded by NSF grant
No. 1124975 and NOAA grant No. NA11NOS4780055
as well as a block grant from the David and Lucile
Packard Foundation to MBARI. NTNU was funded by
the Research Council of Norway and Statoil through the
Center of Excellence on Autonomous Marine Operations
and Systems, grant 223254.
REFERENCES
[1] A. M. Jensen, T. Hardy, M. McKee, and Y . Q. Chen, “Using a
multispectral autonomous unmanned aerial remote sensing plat-
form (aggieair) for riparian and wetland applications,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symp. (IGARSS),
2011.
[2] Y . Kaheil, M. Gill, M. McKee, L. Bastidas, and E. Rosero,
“Downscaling and assimilation of surface soil moisture using
ground truth measurements,” Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 1375–1384, 2008.
[3] J. P. Ryan, S. Johnson, A. Sherman, K. Rajan, F. Py, H. Thomas,
J. Harvey, L. Bird, J. Paduan, and R. Vrijenhoek, “Mobile
autonomous process sampling within coastal ocean observing
systems,” Limnology & Oceanograhy: Methods, vol. 8, pp. 394–
402, 2010.
[4] H. Chao and Y . Chen, Cooperative Remote Sensing and Actua-
tion Using Networked Unmanned Vehicles. Wiley-IEEE Press,
2012.
[5] A. Jensen, B. Neilson, M. McKee, and Y . Chen, “Thermal remote
sensing with an autonomous unmanned aerial remote sensing
platform for surface stream temperatures,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symp. (IGARSS), 2012, pp.
5049–5052.
[6] P. Doherty, F. Heintz, and J. Kvarnstr¨ om, “High-level mission
speciﬁcation and planning for collaborative unmanned aircraft
systems using delegation,” Unmanned Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
75–119, 2013.
[7] S. Moon, E. Oh, and D. H. Shim, “An integral framework of
task assignment and path planning for multiple unmanned aerial
vehicles in dynamic environments,” Journal of Intelligent and
Robotic Systems, vol. 70, no. 1-4, pp. 303–313, April 2013.
[8] I. Maza, K. Kondak, M. Bernard, and A. Ollero, “Multi-UA V
cooperation and control for load transportation and deployment,”
Journal of Intelligent and Robotic Systems, vol. 57, no. 1–4, pp.
417–449, 2010.
[9] J. Das, F. Py, T. Maughan, T. OReilly, M. Messi, J. Ryan,
G. S. Sukhatme, and K. Rajan, “Coordinated sampling of
dynamic oceanographic features with underwater vehicles and
drifters,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 626–646, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/31/5/626.abstract
[10] R. Martins, P. Dias, E. Marques, J. Pinto, J. Sousa, and F. Pereira,
“IMC: A communication protocol for networked vehicles and
sensors,” in OCEANS 2009 - EUROPE, 2009, pp. 1–6.
[11] J. Pinto, P. Calado, J. Braga, P. Dias, R. Martins, E. Marques,
and J. Sousa, “Implementation of a control architecture for net-
worked vehicle systems,” in Proc. IFAC Workshop on Navigation,
Guidance and Control of Underwater Vehicles, 2012.
[12] F. Py, K. Rajan, and C. McGann, “A Systematic Agent Frame-
work for Situated Autonomous Systems,” in 9th International
Conf. on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS),
Toronto, Canada, May 2010.
[13] K. Rajan and F. Py, “T-REX: Partitioned Inference for AUV
Mission Control,” in Further Advances in Unmanned Marine
Vehicles, G. N. Roberts and R. Sutton, Eds. The Institution of
Engineering and Technology (IET), August 2012.
[14] K. Rajan, F. Py, and J. Berreiro, “Towards Deliberative Control
in Marine Robotics,” in Autonomy in Marine Robots, M. Seto,
Ed. Springer Verlag, 2012.
[15] J. E. da Silva and J. B. de Sousa, “A dynamic programming based
path-following controller for autonomous vehicles.” Control and
Intelligent Systems, vol. 39, no. 4, 2011.
[16] ——, “Cooperative path planning in the presence of adversarial
behavior.” Fortuna, Luigi (ed.) et al., From Physics to Control
through an Emergent View 4th international conference on
physics and control (PhysCon2009), Catania, Italy, September
2009.
6611
