Industry-Academia Collaborations in Robotics: Comparing Asia,
Europe and North-America*
Sascha Grifﬁths, Laura Voss and Florian R¨ ohrbein
1
Abstract—Inthiscontribution,welookattechnologytransfer
in robotics. Generally, there is a delay between a science-push
and a market-pull. In order of ﬁnding means to decrease
this lag, we are going to look at the causes of this effect
and at the means for improving technology transfer. For this
purpose, we use a variety of data sources which shed light
on the current situation in Asia, Europe and North-America.
First, we will examine the technology-readiness level (TRL)
scale which can be used as a means of measuring market
readiness of innovative technology. After this we will look
at what means experts ﬁnd useful for technology transfer.
Finally, we investigate academia-industry collaboration as one
tool to increase technology transfer. We demonstrate a strong
collaborationbetweenindustryandacademiainNorthAmerica
which we see as a response to the lower numbers of robots
deployed in the industry in North America compared to Asia
and Europe. This is an on-going trend which occurs in parallel
to a global trend in growing numbers of robots in use.
I. INTRODUCTION
Roboticsisanappliedﬁeldtoalargeextent.Greatsocietal
changes are expected from technological innovations in this
ﬁeld [1] as well as a change in manufacturing and many
other economic areas [2].
In innovation in robotics one can perceive a lag between
science-push and market-pull. This is also called a double-
boom cycle [3] in which one ﬁnds such technology innova-
tion peaks ahead of a peak in the market for that technology.
One example of a double boom on a large scale is the history
of artiﬁcial intelligence where a ﬁrst boom in research efforts
could be noticed in the late 1950s and early 1960 but the ﬁrst
interest by larger industries began in the 1970s [4]. In order
of decreasing the time between the peaks one has to ﬁnd
means of effective technology transfer.
We look at this by comparing different data sources which
shed light on the situation of robotics innovation in Asia,
Europe and North America. Our particular focus is industry-
academia collaboration. As we will argue, this can be seen
as one of the most promising tools for technology transfer.
However,thehistoryofsucheffortshasnotalwaysbeeneasy
due to the problem of ﬁnding common ground [5]. Often the
industry is interested in proﬁt which needs to be shown in
the short term whereas research institutions take a long term
view.
The question which we address here is how technology
*Research supported by the European Union through the 7th Framework
Programme (FP7) under grant agreement number FP7-ICT-231143.
1
Sascha Grifﬁths (corresponding author), Laura Voss and Florian
R¨ ohrbein are with the Department of Informatics, Technische Universit¨ at
M¨ unchen, 85748 Garching, Germany (phone S. Grifﬁths: +49-89-28918132,
sascha.griffiths@in.tum.de).
transfer is handled on different continents. For this purpose
we will ﬁrst look at the technology readiness level (TRL)
scale[6]whichisameansofmeasuringthemarket-readiness
of a technological innovation. The TRL serves as one means
of measuring progress in contrast to the academic measures
of progress, such as number of publications or number of
citation, and the industrial measure of success which would
be monetary proﬁt mainly. We are particularly interested in
how well it is known and how wide spread the adoption of
this scale is.
Further, we will look at what experts suggest is to be done
to increase technology transfer. For this purpose we used a
questionnaire which was handed out to experts on various
occasions. We try to elucidate what the experts regard as
successful means of driving robotics innovation.
In the light of these results, we draw a comparison between
Asia, Europe and North America. First, we are going to look
at where most technology transfer happens. For this purpose,
we have examine the pertinent publications in robotics and
try to assess what quantity of these arise academia-industry
collaborations. Further, we will then look at the actual
numbers of robots in use worldwide to see whether these
efforts actually have already resulted in measurable results.
II. TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER IN ASIA, EUROPE AND
NORTH AMERICA
A. Knowledge transfer between Industry and Academia
In a ﬁrst step, we tried to assess whether technology
transfer is generally considered to be in a good state. For this
purpose, questionnaires were distributed among practitioners
in the ﬁeld of robotics on different continents.
Robotic experts from Asia, Europe and North America
1
,
from both academia and industry, were asked to rate the
quality of know how transfer between academia and industry
([7] [8], Fig. 1. ). Their rating suggests that there is room
for improvement. Only 29% judge technology transfer to be
good whereas only 4% went as faras to call it excellent. This
is only a third of all responses which indicate a clear positive
picture of transfer. Only 3% judge it to be bad but the vast
majority – 64% of the responses – judge technology transfer
to be mediocre. This result does not indicate a devastating
sense of non-communication among industry and academia.
1
31 respondents, all at least senior scientists: 15 experts from Asia and
7 from North America who were visited during two lab tours in 2011 and
2012 as part of the ECHORD project ([9] and [10]), and 9 experts from
Europe who applied for an ECHORD experiment by submitting a proposal
that was above quality threshold but who were not successful because of
the budgetary cut-off.
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 748
Fig. 1. The quality of know how transfer between academia and industry,
as rated by robotic experts from Asia, North America and Europe, from
both academia and industry.
However, the low amount of excellent judgments and the
high amount of medium quality ratings does engender a
discussion on how one can increase the perceived quality
of transfer. Moreover, one may ask how one actually deﬁnes
quality of transfer.
B. Measures of Quality of Transfer
The problem which the section above raises is how the
quality of technology transfer can actually be judged. The
problem is that industry and academia have different curren-
cies for the purpose, metaphorically speaking. The neces-
sarily different standards in the industry and academia lead
to different reward systems for the practioners engaged in
technology development on both sides. The industry values
monetary gains whereas research in academia is evaluated
according to the knowledge gain, which can be quantiﬁed in
the number of publications in which such new knowledge is
codiﬁedandwhicharisesfromtechnologydevelopment[11],
[12]. It is clear that by these standards the industry must seek
robustness of technology whereas academics must strive for
novelty which is often orthogonal at best to robustness.
The ratings do suggest that some kind of common tool for
quality assessment is needed which is independent of the
standards which are discussed above. One such measure is
a scale called the Technology Readiness Level (TRL, [13]).
TheTRLscalegoesfromlevel1basictechnologyresearchto
level9systemtest,launchandoperationsin9discretebutnot
necessarily equidistant steps. One can use this scale as a tool
for deciding how far a technology is in its development but
also as a measure of the progress made within a technology-
oriented research project. The steps which are lower on the
scale and therefore describe an earlier stage of development
will traditionally fall within the domain of academia whereas
the later stages of development which are assigned a higher
numerical value on the scale will traditionally be of interest
to the industry. However, for a technological innovation to
move from a laboratory to the market, this technology will
have to go through all nine stages. The TRL can serve as
a roadmap as well as a means of monitoring the successful
transfer in the process.
We suspected that one possible reason for the mediocre
ratings by the experts (above) could be that concepts like
TRL are not well known. These concepts allow a translation
of the value of results between academia and industry.
TRL is a means of assessing progress independent of the
measures of successful innovation which the two parties
involved – academia and industry – generally adopt to rate
successful work.
The adoption of this scale within the robotics community
still appears thin. For the purpose of ﬁnding out more about
how research efforts are measured on a scale which is neither
speciﬁc to the goals of the industry nor the academic world,
we will now look at how well-known this scale is among
practitioners in the ﬁeld of robotics.
We asked 97 members of the robotics community
2
whether
they were familiar with or even using TRL (Fig. 2). 61%
of the respondents from academia and 76% of those from
industry had not even heard of TRL before.
Whereas TRL is much better known in academia (36%)
Fig.2. Responsesof97membersoftheroboticscommunity,askedwhether
they had heard of the Technology Readiness level (TRL).
as compared to the industry (12%), the adoption rate of
this tool is higher in the industry (12%) as compared to
academia (3%). This suggests that if industrial practitioners
know about TRL they are more likely to use it in comparison
toacademia,wherethescaleisbetterknownbutadoptedless
among the researchers who are aware of the concept.
As half of the experts from the industry who actually are
aware of TRL have used it, we feel that this may be
a useful tool for measuring success. The problem is that
academic researchers seem much more reluctant to rate their
technology in this way according to our survey.
A wider use of such measures of success may help improve
the transfer of technology between academia and industry.
2
41 visitors of the ECHORD booth at Automatica 2012 and IROS 2012,
and 56 authors of publications in major robotics journals that resulted from
academia-industry collaboration.
749
The results of collaboration would become more transparent
through such a tool. However, making the success measur-
able is only one issue. There are other means of improving
collaborations. We address these in the next section.
C. How can knowledge transfer be improved?
We further asked the same robotic experts
3
: ”Which routes
of knowledge transfer do you consider most efﬁcient?” and
”What should be done to improve knowledge transfer?”. The
respondents were given a set of options which they rated
using a Likert scale [9], [10]. The same set of options was
provided for both questions.
The rating results are plotted in Fig. 3 with answers for
Fig. 3. Robotics experts’ responses to Which routes of knowledge transfer
do you consider most efﬁcient? on the abscissa and responses to What
should be done to improve technology transfer on the ordinate.
the 1
st
question on the abscissa and results from the 2
nd
question on the ordinate.
It is apparent that there is a positive relationship between
the two sets of answers. This is clear in most items but there
are also noteworthy deviations: ”Free dissemination” was
ratedratherlowwithrespecttoefﬁciencyanditreceivedonly
moderatevaluesfordesiredincrease.Roughlythesamevalue
for increase was given to ”Recruitment of personnel” which
received a much higher rating in the estimated efﬁciency.
From this we can conclude that the measure of recruitment
should not be employed more than it already is – not because
it is not efﬁcient, but because there is already enough activity
in the current situation.
A strong emphasis lies on measures aiming for a collabora-
tiveeffort,beitresearchcollaborations,publiclyfundedjoint
3
31 respondents, all at least senior scientists: 15 experts from Asia and
7 from North America who were visited during two lab tours in 2011 and
2012 as part of the ECHORD project ([9] and [10]), and 9 experts from
Europe who applied for an ECHORD experiment by submitting a proposal
that was above quality threshold but who were not successful because of
the budgetary cut-off.
projects or even spin-off companies and ventures. Looking
at ”research collaborations”, we observe about the same
high value for efﬁciency, but also a high rating regarding
desired increase. This means there is a large agreement
that this measure is both very important and not enough
employed. Therefore, here one can see an actual opportunity
for increasing a technology-push contingent with a market-
pull.
D. Academia-industry collaborations worldwide
As, according to the robotic experts questioned in our sur-
veys, an increase of research collaborations would have the
potential to improve knowledge transfer between academia
and industry, we looked at where in the world industry-
academiajointprojectsarebased.Assumingthatasuccessful
collaboration will likely result in a scientiﬁc publication we
analyzed successful submissions to major robotics confer-
ences and journals and identiﬁed those which had resulted
from academia-industry collaboration.
We scanned all publications presented at the IROS and the
ICRA conferences, which are the most pertinent venues
for presenting results to the robotics community [12]
4
. The
resultsareillustrated inFig.4. Ofallconference publications
that were result of academia-industry collaboration, most
(42.3%) had at least one author afﬁliated with an institution
or company in North America, followed by Asia/Australia
(38.6%) and Europe (35.7%)
5
. In the majority of the cases
(84.3%), all authors of a speciﬁc paper were from the same
continent.
Three instances of each of the two annual conferences
between 2010 and 2013 were taken into account. In this time
frame, each conference was held once on each of the three
continents (see Fig. 4). No relationship of the country the
conferences took place in and the country of the authors’
afﬁliation could be observed. For example, a conference
taking place in Europe did not mean that most authors of
academia-industry collaborative publications were afﬁliated
with a European institution or company.
The analysis was further enhanced by including ﬁve top
journals in robotics and extending the years analyzed back to
2009
6
. The results are illustrated in Fig. 5. They conﬁrm the
ﬁndings of the conference analysis: A large majority (70.4%)
of the authors of publications which resulted from industry-
academia collaborations was afﬁliated with an institution
or company based in North America. Europe (27.6%) and
Asia/Australia (24.5%) supply not even half as many authors
proportionally.
4
See for example:
http://www.ias.tu-darmstadt.de/Miscellaneous/ConferenceQuality (accessed
15 March 2013).
5
As each publication could have authors from several continents the
percentages do not add up to 100%.
6
Journals analyzed (all issues from 2009-2011): International Journal
of Robotics Research, IEEE Transactions on Robotics, Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, Autonomous Robots, and Robotica. In total 1362
publications, of which 98 (7.2%) were industry-academia cooperations.
750
Fig. 4. Percentage of authors from speciﬁc continents in conference publications that resulted from an academia-industry collaboration at two major
robotics conferences (IROS 2010-2012 and ICRA 2011-2013). The color of the bar stands for the continent where the conference was held, the background
color stands for the continent where the authors’ afﬁliation is located (green: Asia, red: North America, blue: Europe).
Fig. 5. Percentage of authors from speciﬁc continents in journal publi-
cations that resulted from an academia-industry collaboration in ﬁve major
robotics journals between 2009 and 2011.
Methodological note.: The criterion we used to classify
a publication as an academia-industry collaboration was
based solely on the afﬁliations of the contributing authors. A
publication was classiﬁed as collaboration, if and only if at
least one of the authors’ afﬁliations was a company and at
least one an academic institution. In order to check the valid-
ityofthisapproachingeneral,thefollowingcross-checkwas
carried out: An email was sent to the corresponding authors
of all papers that were accepted for the IROS conference
in 2012, asking them to indicate if their paper was the
result of academia-industry collaboration. The 210 answers
received (approx. a quarter of all 858 papers) were compared
with the list of afﬁliations stated on the respondents’ IROS
papers.Thecomparisonrevealedthatourmethodleadstothe
same result in 84% of all cases. There is a substantial share
of 13% of papers which resulted from academia-industry
collaboration but is not visible in the author list, and there
are 6 papers (3%) which do not result from collaboration,
although for some reason the paper is authored by people
from both industry and academia. In summary, our method
is valid for most of the IROS-2012 contributions and there
is no reason to assume that this is different for the other
conferences and journals we have selected.
E. Size of robotics industry worldwide
The question which needs to be answered against the
background of these results is whether a high degree of
collaborating is reﬂected in the commercial application of
the results. With North America being so dominant in terms
of authorship of publications that resulted from academia-
industry collaboration, it seems plausible to assume that
North America is also the part of the world with the most
(successful) academia-industry collaborations in robotics,
while Asia and Europe are much less strongly represented.
This raises the question whether there is a relationship
between the number of successful academia-industry collab-
orations and the size of a continent’s robotics industry.
Looking at the number of robotics units in use worldwide
(see Fig. 7), one can observe a growth in the estimated
operational stock of robots at the respective year-end from
1999 to 2011 on a global level.
Asia/Australia is clearly the strongest continent, followed by
Europe and North America [14]. This relationship between
the continents has been roughly the same since 1999. A
forecast made by the IFR Statistical Department in 2012
suggests that by 2015 the current dominance of Asia will
only increase [14]. Robot sales are predicted to rise by
about 6% in Asia/Australia, about 5% in the Americas, and
about 2% in Europe. In term of shipments, a similar picture
is painted: In Asia most countries are predicted to have a
considerableincreaseofindustrialrobotsoperating,whilethe
robot stocks of most of the European and North American
countries are predicted to stagnate or even slightly decrease.
As the size of the manufacturing industries in different
countries can vary substantially, the total number of robotic
units can be a misleading measure [14]. Thus it can be
useful to take the country’s robot density into account, the
number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000 persons
employed in manufacturing industry.
In terms of robot density, Noth America is ahead of Europe
and Asia in the automotive industry, while in all other
industrial areas, Asia is leading (see Fig. 6; see also [15]).
751
Fig. 7. Estimated operational stock of robots at year-end 1999-2011 (adapted from [14] pp. 117, 140, 213). The green bars represent Asia/Australia. The
blue bars represent Europe. The red bars represent North America.
Fig. 6. Estimated number of multipurpose industrial robots per 10,000
persons employed in automotive industry and in all other industries in 2011
(adapted from [5], p. 56).
The results show that in the current situation North Amer-
ica shows less robotic technology in use in industrial settings
than in both Asia and Europe. This is surprising considering
the fact that the USA (as one part of North America) was the
ﬁrst to adopt robotic technology in manufacturing as early
as the 1960s [16]. In comparison between Japan and the
USA, development in the USA has been slower with regard
to robotics for several decades [17]. The reasons for this
are mainly economic and have to do with fear of loosing
too many jobs in the USA through automation as well as
different views on the returns that robotic technology brings.
However, in line with our argumentation above regarding
effective means of technology transfer and double boom
cycles, we hold it likely that North America may show a
drive towards more operational stock of robotic technology
in the industry in the foreseeable future. What the data on
NorthAmericashowscouldbetheﬁrstpeakinsuchadouble
boom cycle. If industry-academia collaborations are effective
in advancing technology transfer then the growing numbers
of recent collaborations, shown in our analysis of conference
contributionsandjournals,aregoingtobethebasisonwhich
a market-pull follows. This is, however, only a prediction
based on the data available. One will have to monitor the
situation to see whether this will actually happen.
III. DISCUSSION
A. Technology Readiness Levels
As a starting point for our investigation of technology
transfer, we looked at the overall situation and how experts
judge transfer currently. The result is a rather mediocre
view of the current state. However, this rating is based
on experts’ judgments. The experts’ subjective judgments
will be colored by their respective background. The reward
systems in academia and industry differ leading to different
evaluations of the situation. Whereas an academic researcher
mightjudgea projectasuccess usingdissemination activities
as a means of measure, an industrial partner will evaluate
transfer from the perspective of immediate proﬁt.
However, a scale such as TRL would show that there
are many discrete steps along the way which both parties
concerned need to be involved in with differing degrees of
engagement. The steps lower on the scale and earlier in
the development of technology often fall into the domain
of academia whereas the industry will show an increased
interest in the steps which are higher on the scale and later
in the development process.
Adopting such tools as TRL for the monitoring of
successful transfer might lead to an improved transfer
process. However, our data suggests that a vast majority
of experts in the ﬁeld of robotics who were asked about
the topic was not familiar with the concept. Especially,
academic researchers seem reluctant to adopt such a tool in
their work. Though, it is rarely used overall. What needs
to be noted here is that TRL alone does not guarantee
success in the market. There are related concepts which try
to market readiness [6] which supplement the TRL which
752
by itself only measures technology development stages.
B. The State of Technology Transfer
After ﬁnding that technology transfer is widely seen to
be mediocre by experts in the ﬁeld of robotics, we looked
at their suggestions of how technology transfer can be
improved. Our results indicate that overall both proﬁts and
dissemination activities do not serve as a means of good
transfer on their own.
Industry-academia collaborations are judged to be an
effective means of improving transfer, though. The extent to
which this is practiced and its effects were then examined. It
appears that North America is particularly strong in industry-
academia collaborations in the ﬁeld of robotics judging by
joint publications at the most pertinent conferences and
in the relevant journals. However, the industry does not
reﬂect this with Asia having a far larger share of robotic
technology in use than both Europe and North America.
In contrast, though, a density measure reveals that Europe
has the highest density of robots in use. This is a measure
which normalizes the number of robots over the population.
C. Markets and Research in Asia, Europe and North-
America
One can see that despite the fact that America has a good
amount of industry-academia collaborations, both Asia and
Europe show a higher market penetration. The reason for
this is often attributed to a fear that robotics will eliminate
jobs in USA [1].
Our study of research publications, however, shows a very
active research scene in North America which may lead to
changes in the current situation. We assume that this rise
in collaboration is a reply to the lower numbers of robots
deployed in the industry in North America in comparison
to Asia and Europe. The consequence of this increased
and joint technology-push in the robotics research scene in
North America will lead to a boom in the market. Thus,
higher numbers of robots used in industrial settings are to
be expected. Additionally, the delay which usually exists
between science-push and market-pull is going to be much
smaller if the experts we questions are correct in their
assessment of academia-industry collaborations being a very
effective means of driving innovation in robotics.
IV. CONCLUSION
We investigated the process of technology transfer in
robotics. Experts in the ﬁeld of robotics, who we asked for
their opinion, judged the quality of current technology trans-
fer as mediocre rather than good or excellent. To improve
this, we have suggested using tools such as the TRL scale for
a better evaluation of quality in transfer and for practioners
in the ﬁeld to assess their progress.
In the next step, we asked experts to rate which measures
they see as promissing in technology transfer. Industry-
academia collaborations received strong ratings. Thus, we
looked at recent publications in the pertinent literature for
evidence of such collaborative research.
Geographically,NorthAmericaisverystronginthiscompar-
ison. Paradoxically, though, they are behind both Asia and
Europe in industrial deployment of robotic technology.
We suggested that the research activity in North America
may be the peak in a science-push which is eventually
going to lead to a market pull. Therefore, we believe that
industry-academia collaborations should be encouraged for
more successful and faster technology transfer.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the experts who ﬁlled-out our questionnaires
during the North American Lab Tour 2011 and the Lab
Tour of Asia in 2012. Similarly, we are grateful for the
questionnaire data provided by colleagues who participated
in our surveys at the Automatica trade fair in 2012 and the
IROS conference in 2012. We would also like to express
our thanks to those researchers who responded to our emails
regarding industry-academia collaborations.
REFERENCES
[1] S.
ˇ
Sabanoviˇ c, Robots in Society, Society in Robots, International
Journal of Social Robotics, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 439–450, Oct. 2010.
[2] S. J. Shim and A. Kumar, Selection and diversiﬁcation of market
segments for robotics products, Industrial Robot: An International
Journal, vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 401–407, 2005.
[3] U. Schmoch, Double-boom cycles and the comeback of science-push
and market-pull, Research Policy, vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1000–1015, Sep.
2007.
[4] L.Steels,FiftyyearsofAI:Fromsymbolstoembodiment-andback,in
in 50 years of artiﬁcial intelligence, M. Lungarella, F. Iida, J. Bongard,
and R. Pfeifer, Eds. Berlin / Heidelberg: Springer, 2007, pp. 18–28.
[5] R. Lafrenz, Rise of the robots, Public Service Review: European
Union, vol. 18, 2009.
[6] D. Dent and B. Pettit, Technology and Market Readiness Levels. Dent
Associates, 2011.
[7] F. R¨ ohrbein, ECHORD Deliverable 4.2 General Technology Polls,
2011.
[8] F. R¨ ohrbein and S. Grifﬁths, ECHORD Deliverable 5.1 – White Paper
– Technology Transfer opportunities in European Robotics, 2013.
[9] A. Knoll, Ed., ECHORD Lab Tour to North America. Final
Report, 2012. Available online at http://echord.info/
file/Documents/WP5-pr-dissemination/Flyers-etc/
labtour-web.pdf.
[10] A. Knoll, Ed., ECHORD Lab Tour to Asia. Japan, South Korea
and China. Final Report, 2012. Available online at http:
//echord.info/file/Attachments/wikis/website/
cc-publications/Echord LabTourReport Asia.pdf.
[11] S. Grifﬁths and F. R¨ ohrbein, Technology Transfer in Academia-
Industry Collaborations, KI - K¨ unstliche Intelligenz, Sep. 2013.
[12] F. R¨ ohrbein, S. Grifﬁths, and L. Voss, On Industry-Academia Collab-
orations in Robotics, Technical Report TUM-I1338, 2013.
[13] J. C. Mankins, ”Technology Readiness Levels: A White Paper”.
NASA, Ofﬁce of Space Access and Technology, Advanced Concepts
Ofﬁce, 1995.
[14] IFR Statistical Department, World Robotics 2012 Industrial Robotics,
2012.
[15] E. Guizzo, The Rise of the Machines, IEEE Spectrum [online], 1
Dec 2008. http://spectrum.ieee.org/robotics/industrial-robots/the-rise-
of-the-machines (Accessed 9 September 2013).
[16] G. A. Bekey, Autonomous Robots. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005.
[17] E.Mansﬁeld,ThediffusionofindustrialrobotsinJapanandtheUnited
States, Research Policy, vol. 18, pp. 183–192, 1989.
753
