  
? 
Abstract— This paper presents a novel motion control method 
of a micro-robot for biomedical applications. The proposed 
micro-robot is composed of a permanent magnet with oblique 
magnetization, and the electromagnetic actuation (EMA) system 
consists of only two pairs of Helmholtz coils arranged at a right 
angle on a horizontal plane. While conventional systems 
generally use the magnetic field gradient for the propulsion, the 
proposed system uses only a uniform magnetic field. By virtue of 
these strategies, we can make the system smaller and reduce the 
power consumption compared to the pre-existing EMA systems. 
To verify the feasibility of the proposed system, basic 
experiments and trajectory tracking were performed under 
different environments. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Because of the size limitation of the micro-robot, the 
self-propulsion type micro-robot which has the actuation 
module including the power source is not suitable for 
biological or medical applications. To overcome such 
disadvantages, different kinds of actuation mechanisms have 
been proposed to propel the micro-robot with a wireless 
energy source. Among several actuation methods, an 
electromagnetic actuation (EMA) system composed of 
Helmholtz coils and Maxwell coils has been in the spotlight 
due to its simplicity. For example, K. B. Yesin et al. [1] 
suggested a two-dimensional EMA system with a motor, a 
Helmholtz pair, and a Maxwell pair. This initial system 
showed the possibility of the EMA system to control the 
micro-robot. However, its use in medical applications is 
limited because of its large size, mechanical moving part, and 
high power consumption. Since then, several variations have 
been researched to solve the aforementioned problems. 
Two-dimensional EMA systems with relatively reduced 
power [2-5], a micro-robot for drilling [6], and an EMA 
system with a clamping coil [7] were presented. Furthermore, 
there were also various attempts to implement an EMA system 
for three-dimensional motion control [8-11]. Especially, B. J. 
Nelson et al. showed fairly good results of a three-dimensional 
EMA system entitled ‘OctoMag’ for the purpose of 
intraocular surgery [12-15]. After targeting the size of a 
workspace to be 222 ?? (
3
mm ), they used the large size of 
soft-magnetic-core electromagnets to generate accurate and 
high magnetic fields. 
 
*This research was supported by the Korea Institute of Science and 
Technology (KIST) Institutional Program (Project no.2E24721). 
Jinsoo Kim is now with Center for Bionics, Korea Institute of Science and 
Technology (KIST), Hwarangno 14-gil 5, Seongbuk-gu, Seoul 136-791, 
Republic of Korea (cskarisma@kist.re.kr).  
Seung-Jong Kim is also now with Center for Bionics, KIST 
(corresponding author, phone: +82-10-9229-3475; fax: +82-2-958-6784; 
e-mail: sjongkim@kist.re.kr, sjkim386@gmail.com). 
However, all these previous methods used magnetic field 
gradients for generating thrust forces, and they required still 
too much power for propelling the micro-robot. To be specific, 
driving forces induced by the magnetic field gradient are 
directly proportional to the volume of the micro-robot, 
whereas the friction force at high Reynolds number is in 
proportion to the cross sectional area of it. In the case of very 
low Reynolds number less than 1, the Stokes’ drag force is 
directly proportional to the characteristic linear dimension of 
the micro-robot. In other words, the smaller the micro-robot’s 
size is, the greater the magnetic field gradient is needed. Thus, 
the power consumption problem becomes more aggravated. In 
order to avoid a usage of the magnetic field gradient, there was 
also different approach using the uniform magnetic field only. 
A micro-swimmer composed of a larger polystyrene bead and 
a smaller magnetic particle connected via a bacteria flagella 
filament was presented [16]. However, bacteria flagella may 
be dangerous for medical applications, and there is no 
evidence that inserting bacteria flagella into the human body 
will not incur any troubles. 
In this paper, we propose a novel concept of EMA system 
for a micro-robot’s two-dimensional motion control without 
using a magnetic field gradient. Different from previous works, 
the proposed EMA system requires only one stationary 
Helmholtz pair of each x- and y-axis, respectively. By virtue 
of removing an additional coil pair and utilizing nothing but a 
uniform magnetic field, the newly proposed EMA system can 
have a smaller volume and lower power consumption than the 
previous ones. Furthermore, these advantages will be 
amplified for the smaller size of the micro-robot. In our study, 
we introduce the postulates of electromagnetic theory in 
section ?. Section ? gives a detail explanation of the 
micro-robot and our proposed EMA system. Section ? deals 
with two different principles of generating thrust force. Next, 
section ? presents the experiment results and section ? gives 
the discussions. Lastly, section ? concludes the research of 
the paper. 
II. POSTULATES OF ELECTROMAGNETIC THEORY 
When a magnetic moment is placed in an externally 
produced magnetic field, it has a potential energy. As a result, 
the external magnetic field can apply both magnetic torque 
and force to it. In other words, there exists aligning torque on 
the micro-robot which has the magnetic moment, as follows: 
 V?? ? MB (1) 
where V and M are the volume and magnetization of a 
micro-robot, and B represents an externally applied magnetic 
field. 
A Novel Two-dimensional Locomotion Scheme of a Micro-robot  
with Only a Uniform Magnetic Field 
Jinsoo Kim and Seung-Jong Kim 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2071
  
If the external magnetic field is non-uniform, there will be 
a magnetic force proportional to the magnetic field gradient 
[17]. It can be described as: 
 ? ? V ? ?? F M B (2) 
A pair of Helmholtz coils consists of two identical circular 
coils that are placed symmetrically along a common axis and 
separated by a distance equal to the radius of the coil. Each 
coil carries an equal current flowing in the same direction, and 
this makes it possible to generate a uniform magnetic field 
[18]. Thus, two pairs of Helmholtz coils are used to align the 
micro-robot on a plane by generating a uniform magnetic field 
in a desired direction. The micro-robot experiences magnetic 
torque until its orientation coincides with the direction of the 
magnetic field, and it is not affected by the magnetic force by 
virtue of the uniform magnetic field. The magnetic field at the 
center of workspace is obtained as: 
 ? ?
1.5
0
4
0
5
xx
x
x
ni
Bx
R
?
??
??
??
??
 (3) 
where 
0
? , 
x
n , 
x
i , 
x
R are the magnetic permeability of free 
space, the number of coil turns, the current intensity of each 
coil, and the radius of coil, respectively. The subscript x 
means the x direction. 
Even though Helmholtz coils produce a uniform magnetic 
field, if the workspace is set too large, then there may be 
unintended consequences. For instance, when the micro-robot 
is positioned at the end of the workspace, it will experience a 
force due to the magnetic field gradients. Therefore, the 
boundary of the workspace is decided to 
1
,
6
x
x y R
??
??
??
??
. 
Helmholtz configuration has only a 0.09% variation in field 
strength between the center and the boundary of a workspace. 
The magnetic field at the boundary of a workspace is 
calculated as: 
 
1.5 1.5
0
1
6
1 9 9
2 10 13
x
xx
x
xR
x
ni
B
R
?
?
??
?? ? ? ? ?
??
??
? ? ? ?
? ? ? ?
??
??
 (4) 
III. MICRO-ROBOT AND EMA CONTROL SYSTEM 
A.  Configuration of EMA coils 
The proposed EMA system consists of two sets of circular 
shaped Helmholtz coils which are perpendicularly arranged as 
shown in Fig. 1. In the figure, the X-axis coils are called HX1 
and HX2, and the Y-axis coils are referred to as HY1 and HY2. 
Table I shows the specifications of the coils. The diameter of 
the used cooper wire is 1( ) mm and the workspace of the 
micro-robot is set to 20 20 ? (
2
mm ) that is a ninth of the area 
enclosed by EMA coils. In addition, the EMA system is made 
of the duralumin to avoid the magnetization by an external 
magnetic field. With these specifications, the X-directional 
maximum magnetic field at the center of the workspace is 
calculated at 10.62( ) mT with a current of 5( ) A (the 
maximum current our power amplifier can provide) applied to 
HX1 and HX2 in the same direction. Here, note that these 
 
Figure 1 (a) A 3D design drawing (b) A top view of the EMA coils 
 
TABLE I.  SPECIFICAIONS OF EACH EMA COILS 
Type of coil 
Radius 
(mm) 
Number 
of turns 
Width of 
bobbin (mm) 
Height of 
bobbin (mm) 
HX1, HX2 80 189 18 14 
HY1, HY2 60 104 14 10 
 
currents are directly proportional to the magnetic torque. In 
the case of the Y direction, the maximum magnetic field is 
7.74( ) mT , which is sufficiently high to control the direction 
of the micro-robot. 
B. Oscillatory magnetic field 
In order to generate an oscillatory magnetic field, two 
parameters are required, e.g. base angle (
b
? ) and perturbation 
angle (
p
? ). The direction of an oscillatory magnetic field is 
represented as: 
 ?? ? ? cos
bp
tt ? ? ? ? ?? (5) 
where ? denotes the angular velocity. Fig. 2 shows the case 
of 45
b
? ? , 30
p
? ? . 
The Helmholtz coil pairs can generate an oscillatory 
magnetic field using a trigonometric function form of currents. 
For example, the currents of Helmholtz coil pairs can be 
assigned as: 
 ?? ? ? ? ?
cos cos
x
x b p
x
R
i t t
n
? ? ? ? ?? (6) 
 
?? ? ? ? ?
sin cos
y
y b p
y
R
i t t
n
? ? ? ? ?? (7) 
 
 
Figure 2 Oscillatory magnetic field 
2072
  
 
Figure 3 (a) A photo of the micro-robot (b) The magnetization direction of 
the micro-robot in 3D view (c) Vector M in a top view (d) Vector M in a 
side view (The yellow mark ‘X’ at the origin in figure (c) and (d) represents 
the center of mass (COM) of the micro-robot. The orange marks ‘X’ in figure 
(c) and (d) represent the COM of the cube and cylinder part.) 
 
where ??
x
it and ??
y
it denote the currents of x-axis and 
y-axis Helmholtz coil pairs respectively, and ? is a 
proportionality constant. 
The magnetization of the micro-robot should coincide 
with the generated oscillating magnetic field. In spite of its 
uniform distribution, it can also have an effect on the 
micro-robot’s translational motion. To be specific, the 
direction of the propulsion motion is also determined by the 
base angle of the oscillating magnetic field. 
C. Magnetization and shape of the micro-robot 
The presented micro-robot is composed of the neodymium 
permanent magnets ( 1.22( )
r
BT ? , 891( / )
c
H kA m ? , 
NdFe35). Two cylinder-type magnets which have the 
diameter of 1.5 (mm) and the thickness of 1 (mm) are attached 
to a cube type magnet (
3
2 2 2( ) mm ?? ) as shown in Fig. 3. 
Our proposed EMA system is designed to generate a 
uniform magnetic field which is directly related to magnetic 
torque; the magnetic torque itself cannot propel the 
micro-robot. In the case of generating thrust force without a 
magnetic field gradient, it is required to make nonzero net 
friction force. Strictly speaking, the time average of net 
friction force should have directionality based on the base 
angle of an oscillatory magnetic field. Furthermore, it is the 
magnetization direction of the micro-robot that plays an 
important role in generating that directionality. Thus, the 
micro-robot is magnetized obliquely, and the angle between 
the x axis and the magnetization direction in Fig. 3 (c) is 
referred to as the oblique angle (? ). A detailed explanation 
will be described in Section ?. 
D. Composition of overall EMA control system 
The entire EMA system consists of a micro-robot, a 
localization system, a control part, a power amplifier, and the 
EMA coils. A localization system (e.g. industrial camera) 
detects the micro-robot’s position and orientation, while the 
control part calculates exact currents based on the feedback 
 
Figure 4 A schematic diagram of the whole system 
 
 
Figure 5 Overall view of the EMA control system 
 
data. A power amplifier applies a current to make the 
pre-calculated magnetic field distribution and the micro-robot 
reacts to the magnetic field as described in Fig. 4. 
To identify the direction and position of the micro-robot, a 
webcam (ARTCAM-022MINI, 752 480 ? , 50FPS) captures 
its image. Localization is performed using the Matlab program, 
by comparing the image and the background image 
pre-captured without the micro-robot. The system also 
includes a NI USB-6259 device for data transfer, a power 
amplifier (PWM type, 5 ~ 5( ) A ? , bandwidth 100(Hz)) for 
the voltage-to-current signal conversion, and the Labview 
program for the real-time control of the micro-robot. Fig. 5 
shows the overall EMA control system. 
IV. PRINCIPLE OF PROPELLING THE MICRO-ROBOT BY USING 
ONLY UNIFORM MAGNETIC FIELDS 
A. Moving forward 
When the uniform magnetic field is applied in an x-y plane, 
the micro-robot rotates around its center of mass (COM) to 
align its magnetization with the external magnetic field. 
Magnetic torque can be decomposed into the z component and 
the x-y component as noted in (8). 
 ? ?
z z z z
V V V V
??
? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? ? M B M M B M B M B (8) 
where 
z ?
M and 
z
M represent the x-y component and the z 
component of magnetization, respectively. 
 
2073
  
 
Figure 6 Vector analysis of moving forward in (a) x-z plane (b) x-y plane 
during the clockwise rotation (COM is referred to as point O. The green solid 
line in (b) represents the contact points between the micro-robot and surface. 
The red dashed line and blue dashed lines in (b) are the baseline and the 
boundary of perturbation, respectively. 
C
P  and 
CC
P represent the 
intersection points between the boundary of perturbation and contact line. 
E
P is the intersection point between the base line and the contact line. 
MF
P 
is the intersection point between the magnetic field B and the contact line. 
m , g , 
x
? , 
y
? , 
Gx
? , 
Gy
? are the micro-robot’s mass, the acceleration of 
gravity, the x and y component of 
? ? , zB ?
? , the x and y component of 
G
? , 
respectively.) 
 
The former term, 
z
V
?
? MB , on the right hand side in (8) 
is called the z-axis magnetic torque (
z
? ) which makes a 
clockwise or counterclockwise rotation in the x-y plane. The 
latter, 
z
V ? MB , is referred to as the x-y plane magnetic 
torque (
? ? , zB ?
? ) that is orthogonal to the z axis and the 
magnetic field as illustrated in Fig. 6 (b). Furthermore, 
? ? , zB ?
? 
plays a significant role in changing the center of rotation 
(COR) (when the micro-robot rotates in x-y plane), which 
makes it possible to propel the micro-robot without the 
magnetic field gradient. When the tail part of the micro-robot 
is lifted because of the x-y plane magnetic torque (
? ? , zB ?
? ), 
gravity makes gravitational torque (
G
? ) in the opposite 
direction as described in Fig. 6. As a result of equilibrium of 
torques (
? ? , G zB ?
? ? ? ), the micro-robot stands at a tilt angle 
(
f
? ), and it still has the z component of magnetization. 
The x-y plane magnetic torque (
? ? , zB ?
? ) presses on the 
maximum friction point 
MF
P the most, and therefore this 
point receives the highest friction and functions like a hinge. 
To be specific, because of this unsymmetrical friction, the 
center of rotation is changed from the point O to the point on 
the line segment 
MF
OP . 
As described in Section ?, an oscillatory magnetic field is 
applied between the boundary of perturbation. In the case of 
clockwise rotation, 
MF
P is located on the line segment 
EC
PP , 
whereas it is located on the line segment 
E CC
PP during the 
counterclockwise rotation. The time average of the net friction 
force has the directionality which is the same with the base 
angle. As a result, a gradual change of the center of rotation 
can make it possible for the micro-robot to move forward with 
a crawling type of motion. 
 
 
Figure 7 Vector analysis of backward movement in (a) x-z plane (b) x-y plane 
during clockwise rotation (
b
? is the tilt angle.) 
 
B. Moving backwards 
The micro-robot can be moved in any direction by the 
forward-moving scheme explained before. One interesting 
fact is that if the micro-robot is initially magnetized with the 
oblique magnetic field which has a negative z component as 
illustrated in Fig. 7 (a), it moves backwards in spite of 
applying the same oscillatory magnetic field. 
The moving principle is similar to the previous one, except 
for several things. The direction of the x-y plane magnetic 
torque (
? ? , zB ?
? ) is changed as a consequence of the negative z 
component of magnetization, and the contact line is changed 
to the cylinder side as shown in Fig. 7. Also, 
MF
P is located on 
the line segment 
EC
PP during clockwise rotation, whereas it 
is located on the line segment 
E CC
PP during the 
counterclockwise rotation as described in Fig. 7 (b). Thus, in 
this case, the gradual change of center of rotation makes the 
micro-robot move backwards. 
C. The role of the tail 
According to the explanation in Section ? A. and B., it is 
possible to move the micro-robot without the tail part in the 
forward or backward direction. The only difference between 
the previous proposed structure and the micro-robot without a 
tail is the location of COM. However, when it comes to 
rotation around COR which does not coincide with COM, the 
tail part enhances the inertial effects and this makes the 
micro-robot move faster. In moving backwards, this effect is 
slightly scaled down because biased COM shortens the length 
of 
MF
OP , reduces x-y plane magnetic torque (
? ? , zB ?
? ) and tilt 
angle (
b
? ), and lessens the shift of COR from COM. If the tail 
is detached, the COM is located at the exact center of the cube 
component and moving speed of the micro-robot during both 
forward and backward motion is almost the same. 
V. EXPERIMENT RESULTS 
First, we confirmed the validity of moving forward and 
backward strategy with and without the tail structure. During 
all these experiments, each parameter was set to the same 
value; for example, the frequency of oscillating field 
(
2
f
?
?
? ) and perturbation angle were set to 1.25(Hz) and 
30 , respectively. Open-loop actuation tests based on the 
2074
  
 
Figure 8 Forward motion with the tail for various base angles  (a) 0
b
? ?  
(b) 22.5
b
? ? (c) 45
b
? ? (d) 90
b
? ? (Two frames from a movie are 
superimposed with the path taken by the robot. The yellow arrow shows the 
desired moving direction (
b
? ). The red mark ‘x’ and line represent the 
real-time localization results, i.e. position and orientation of the micro-robot, 
by using a detection algorithm. The blue mark ‘x’ represents the center of 
workspace.) 
 
 
Figure 9 (a) Error between the base angle (expected moving angle) and the 
actual moving angle (b) Mean velocity for each direction 
 
 
Figure 10 (a) Triangular trajectory tracking on a slightly uneven surface  
(b) Square trajectory tracking on a very smooth surface (Several frames from 
a movie are superimposed with the path taken by the robot, shown with the 
yellow arrows. The real-time position and orientation of the micro-robot is 
marked with a red line and the center of workspace is represented by the blue 
mark ‘x’.) 
 
proposed methods were verified successfully by generating 
thrust force of various angles as depicted in Fig. 8. 
However, there were also angle errors and velocity 
fluctuations depending on the base angle and the type of 
methodology. We measured the errors and fluctuations, and 
calculated the mean and standard deviation as illustrated in 
Fig. 9. ‘MF’ and ‘MB’ mean ‘Moving Forward’ and ‘Moving 
Backwards’, and the letter ‘T’ represents an acronym for 
‘Tail’. Thus, ‘MF’ is the case of moving forward without the 
tail part, whereas ‘MFT’ is the case of moving forward with 
the tail. Each trial classified with the both angles ( 0 , 90 , 
180 , and 270 ) and the types of method (MF, MFT, MB, 
and MBT) were repeated at least 5 times. 
Lastly, we carried out the trajectory tracking based on the 
prior direction test and localization data. Different shapes of 
trajectory were tried and we verified reliable results in Fig. 10. 
Different types of surface were also attempted in order to 
identify the role of friction affected by surface roughness. Fig. 
10 (a) was performed on a duralumin surface which was 
slightly uneven on a microscopic level, whereas (b) was done 
on a very smooth silicon wafer surface whose roughness was 
manufactured with nanoscale precision. All these experiments 
are available in the supplementary video clips. 
VI. DISCUSSION 
Our proposed moving mechanisms are supported by the 
experiment data. In Fig. 9 (b), MFT has greater mean velocity 
than MF by virtue of increasing inertial effects as we 
described in section ?. MF and MB have almost the same 
velocity, because both of them do not have a tail, and thus 
there is no difference between them except for the moving 
direction. Of course, each velocity shows different tendencies 
depending on the base angle, but we deal with the average 
case only. In the case of MBT, the increased inertial effect is 
counterbalanced by the reduction of distance between COM 
and COR, so its mean velocity is similar to MF and MB. In 
sum, MFT has the greatest mean velocity with the lowest 
angle error among these methods, and this is why we choose 
MFT for trajectory tracking in Fig. 10. 
2075
  
In the case of trajectory tracking, we performed several 
experiments on different surfaces. When the tracking is 
performed on a very flat surface, mean velocity is reduced 
compared to the velocity of an uneven surface, because the 
friction coefficient of a flat silicon wafer is smaller than that of 
the uneven case. As a result, the reduction in friction force 
leads to a smaller distance between COM and COR, and 
causes a lower moving velocity of the micro-robot. Thus, 
these results indicate that friction plays a significant role on 
the thrust force. 
Finally, we checked the execution time of trajectory 
tracking between the proposed method and previous 
approaches using the magnetic field gradient in [1-11, 15]. All 
environment conditions (e.g. the shape and overall distance of 
trajectory, the size and shape of the micro-robot, and the 
roughness of surface) are set to the same value. The execution 
time of our proposed method is almost equal to that of 
previous research, even though our method requires only a 
small amount of the current in comparison to the previous 
ones. In other words, the proposed method is power efficient 
for two-dimensional motion control of the micro-robot. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we suggested a new type of micro-robot with 
oblique magnetization and proposed a novel scheme of 
micro-robot’s two-dimensional motion control without 
magnetic field gradient generally used by conventional 
approaches. Motion control with only a uniform magnetic 
field can make it possible to control the micro-robot in a fairly 
accurate way and reduce the power consumption compared to 
the previous methods. 
In order to apply our proposed method to the medical field, 
it should be verified that our method can make the sufficient 
thrust force to overcome the viscous drag forces in the body. 
Furthermore, it might be possible to utilize the viscous drag 
synergistically. These considerations including fluidic 
environment are also consequential in the context of 
applicability at low Reynolds number in order to minimize the 
size of the micro-robot. Furthermore, three-dimensional 
extension of the proposed method will be required to increase 
the application field. 
APPENDIX 
Supplementary video clips associated with this paper can be 
found in the online version. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Korea Institute of 
Science and Technology (KIST) Institutional Program 
(Project no.2E24721). 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. B. Yesin, K. Vollmers, and B. J. Nelson, “Modeling and control of 
untethered biomicrorobots in a fluidic environment using 
electromagnetic fields,”  Int. J. Robot. Res., vol. 25, no. 5-6, May-June 
2006. 
[2] H. Choi, J. Choi, G. Jang, J. o. Park, and S. Park, “Two-dimensional 
actuation of a microrobot with a stationary two-pair coil system,” 
Smart Mater. Struct., vol. 18, no. 5, May 2009. 
[3] S. Jeon, G. Jang, H. Choi, and S. Park, “Magnetic navigation system 
with gradient and uniform saddle coils for the wireless manipulation of 
micro-robots in human blood vessels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 
6, June 2010. 
[4] H. Choi, J. Choi, S. Jeong, C. Yu, J. o. Park, and S. Park, 
“Two-dimensional locomotion of a microrobot with a novel stationary 
electromagnetic actuation system,” Smart Mater. Struct., vol.18, no. 11, 
Nov. 2009. 
[5] Q. Cao, X. Han, B. Zhang, and L. Li, “Analysis and optimal design of 
magnetic navigation system using Helmholtz and Maxwell coils,” 
IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercon., vol. 22, no. 3, June 2012. 
[6] S. Jeong, H. Choi, K. Cha, J. Li, J. o. Park, S. Park, “Enhanced 
locomotive and drilling microrobot using precessional and gradient 
magnetic field,” Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys., vol. 171, pp. 429-435, Nov. 
2011. 
[7] S. Floyd, C. Pawashe, and M. Sitti, “An untethered magnetically 
actuated micro-robot capable of motion on arbitrary surfaces,” IEEE 
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 419-424, May 2008. 
[8] S. Jeong, H. Choi, J. Choi, C. Yu, J. o. Park, and S. Park, “Novel 
electromagnetic actuation (EMA) method for 3-dimensional 
locomotion of intravascular microrobot,” Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys., vol. 
157, pp. 118-125, Jan. 2010. 
[9] C. Yu, H. Choi, J. Park, and S. Park, “Three-dimensional 
electromagnetic actuation system for intravascular locomotion,” 
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 540-545, 
Oct. 2009. 
[10] H. Choi, K. Cha, J. Choi, S. Jeong, S. Jeon, G. Jang, J. o. Park, and S. 
Park, “EMA system with gradient and uniform saddle coils for 3D 
locomotion of microrobot,” Sensor. Actuat. A-Phys., vol. 163, Sep. 
2010. 
[11] C. Yu, J. Kim, H. Choi, J. Choi, S. Jeong, K. Cha, J. o. Park, and S. Park, 
“Novel electromagnetic actuation system for three-dimensional 
locomotion and drilling of intravascular microrobot,” Sensor. Actuat. 
A-Phys., vol. 161, pp. 297-304, June 2010. 
[12] J. J. Abbott, O. Ergeneman, M. P. Kummer, A. M. Hirt, and B. J. 
Nelson, “Modeling magnetic torque and force for controlled 
manipulation of soft-magnetic bodies,” IEEE Trans. on Robotics, vol. 
23, no. 6, Dec. 2007. 
[13] Z. Nagy, O. Ergeneman, J. J. Abbott, M. Hutter, A. M. Hirt, and B. J. 
Nelson, “Modeling assembled-MEMS microrobots for wireless 
magnetic control,” IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation, pp. 
874-879, May 2008. 
[14] C. Bergeles, K. Shamaei, J. J. Abbott, and B. J. Nelson, “Single-camera 
focus-based localization of intraocular devices,” IEEE Trans. on 
Biomed. Eng., vol. 57, no. 8, Aug. 2010. 
[15] M. P. Kummer, J. J. Abbott, B. E. Kratochvil, R. Borer, A. Sengul, and 
B. J. Nelson, “OctoMag: an electromagnetic system for 5-DOF wireless 
micromanipulation,” IEEE Trans on Robotics, vol. 26, no. 6, Dec. 
2010. 
[16] U. K. Cheang, D. Roy, J. H. Lee, and M. J. Kim, “Fabrication and 
magnetic control of bacteria-inspired robotic microswimmers,” Appl. 
Phys. Lett., vol. 97, Issue 21, Nov. 2010. 
[17] T. H. Boyer, “The force on a magnetic dipole,” Am. J. Phys., vol. 56, no. 
8, Aug. 1988. 
[18] S. T. Lin and A. R. Kaufmann, “Helmholtz coils for production of 
powerful and uniform fields and Gradients,” Reviews of Modern Phys., 
vol. 25, no. 1, Jan. 1953. 
 
2076
