  
? 
Abstract—Unmanned rescue, observation and/or research 
vehicles with high terrain adaptability, fast velocity and high 
reliability to reach difficult rough terrain locations are still 
demanded, but most vehicles increase rough terrain adapt ability at 
the expense of low velocity and/or complex mechanisms. We 
propose a novel vehicle consisting of a very simple blade-type 
crawler and active antennas with rollers, resembling a wharf roach. 
This configuration assures stable travelling over uneven terrain at 
high-speeds, with a very simple and reliable mechanism. This article 
presents the basic concept, mechanical design of the crawler and the 
antennas, and the basic motion control strategies. Moreover, we 
built and tested the first small mechanical prototype named 
KEIOS-I, and got successful results from experiments on uneven 
terrain at a high-speed traveling, and also lateral travelling and 
jumping motions. Future work will also implement roller skating 
mode using the active antennas equipped with rollers. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Many robots have been developed for rough terrain, such 
as rescue robots and observation robots. These robots are 
used instead of people to carry out data collection and other 
operations in locations that are dangerous or difficult for 
people to enter [1]. These robots must perform over rough 
terrain, have the ability to move in multiple directions, have 
speed, a simple mechanism, and should be easy to control. 
Many studies have focused on improving the performance 
of mobile robots for rough terrain by compromising on other 
features. Furthermore, there is a concern that if the robots are 
expensive, situations in which they may be deployed will be 
limited. Therefore, we aimed to design a mechanism that 
improves robot performance over rough terrain using a 
simple and inexpensive system configuration, which to some 
extent does not require lowering of speed or use of complex 
controls and mechanisms. In this manner, Blade-type crawler 
mechanism was developed. This mechanism has blades 
mounted around the crawler belt. Furthermore, because the 
only modification is the addition of blades, the crawler belts 
move at a speed similar to ordinary crawler. 
In this paper, we propose a small type unmanned ground 
vehicle with blade-type crawler mechanism adapted to 
narrow and uneven rough terrains intricate in high-speed 
traveling? Recently, by using the characteristics of the insects 
as a reference, small type robots achieved high mobility on 
rough terrain [2]~[4]. In order to improve the rough terrain 
drivability with small size, it is necessary not only to simply 
miniature analogously but also to inspire from the wharf 
roach, which has high mobility despite of small size.  
 
1
Y. Yamada, G. Endo and Edwardo F. Fukushima are with the 
Department of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Tokyo Institute of 
Technology, 2-12-1Ookayama, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 152-8552, Japan, 
(yamada156 at 2009.jukuin.keio.ac.jp, {gendo, fukushima} at 
mes.titech.ac.jp) 
II. BLADE-TYPE CRAWLER VEHICLE 
A.  Blade-Type Crawler mechanism 
Typical mechanisms for moving robots over rough terrain 
include a leg-type, a wheel-type [5], and a crawler-type. The 
aim of the mobile mechanism developed in this study is to 
improve both performances of traveling speed and over rough 
terrain. In general, the over rough terrain performance of the 
leg-type mechanism is high, but the speed is low. In the case 
of the wheel-type mechanism, the speed is fast, but the 
performance over rough terrain is low. The crawler-type 
mechanism provides a balance between the above mentioned 
features. For the reasons outlined above, crawler-type 
mechanisms are often used for rescue robots, and thus, this 
study is based on that mechanism. However, in case of using 
ordinary crawler belts, the traveling performance over rough 
terrain of significant unevenness is inadequate. 
Therefore, special devices, such as variable crawler belt 
mechanisms, have been introduced to address this problem 
[6][7]. However, with this kind of active variable mechanism 
there is often a trade-off with performance due to increase of 
the number of actuator and complexity of the mechanism. 
In this study, we aim at performance improvement through 
other passive methods. Increasing the size of the crawler belt 
wheel diameter is one method for improving performance 
while still maintaining a simple crawler mechanism. 
However, if the wheel diameter is simply increased, the 
overall height of the vehicle increases proportionally, and its 
operability in narrow rough terrain is decreased. Failure to 
extend the wheelbase with the increased diameter will cause 
the device to tumble while traveling on steps. 
 
 
(a) Static condition 
 
 
(b) Running condition 
 
 
(c) Running condition in the uneven rough terrain 
 
Fig. 1 Blade-type crawler belt mechanism 
Wheel
Crawler Belt
Blade
Floating height
Wheel center height
Blade-Type Crawler Vehicle Bio-inspired by a Wharf Roach 
Yasuyuki Yamada
1
,Member, IEEE, Gen Endo
1
 and Edwardo F. Fukushima
1
,Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 806
  
To address this, we studied passive mechanisms with small 
diameter wheels that increases the diameter when the vehicle 
is moving. To keep the cost of the system low, not only does 
the mechanism need to be simple but also it must be easy to 
control. Therefore, the number of actuators used should be 
kept to a minimum. To use wheel speed to enlarge the wheel 
diameter, we focused on the centrifugal force generated 
around the wheel when the crawler is actuated, and we then 
applied this force during operation. For this purpose, we 
devised a “blade-type crawler mechanism” with blades that 
are mounted passively and are flexible on the crawler belt. 
Figure 1 shows an outline drawing of the mechanism. When 
the vehicle is static or moving slowly as in the Fig. 1 (a), the 
overall height barely changes from the ordinary-crawler, but 
during high-speed operation as in the Fig. 1(b), the blades 
open outward because of the centrifugal force and the wheel 
diameter is effectively increased. When the blades open, each 
of them make contact with the ground and act like legs. This 
creates a gap between the body of the vehicle and the ground, 
allowing the vehicle to move on an uneven ground efficiently 
as in the Fig.1 (c). Therefore, it is possible to adjust to the 
unevenness of ground surfaces. Furthermore, the 
performance over rough terrain is better than that for vehicles 
where the actual wheel diameter itself is increased. 
Furthermore, in the case of significant terrain unevenness, 
because the blades on the front crawler belts of the vehicle 
come in contact with the uneven ground ahead of the vehicle, 
the ability of the vehicle to overcome obstacles is improved. 
Moreover, the rear side of the vehicle is thought to be lifted 
by the blades. The advantages of the blade–type crawler over 
rigid grosser crawler are as follows: 
 
?Better step mobility 
In rigid fixed grouser, increasing wheel diameter will cause 
the vehicle to tumble during step movements as shown in Fig. 
2(a). In order to avoid tumbling, extending wheel base is 
required. In other words, this is just size up. On the other hand, 
in case of the blade–type crawler, even increase the wheel 
diameter temporarily, it is possible to travel high step without 
tumbling as shown in Fig. 2 (b) by adapting the flexible blade 
on the step. Therefore, blade–type crawlers provide high 
performance of over the step without vehicle size up. 
 
?Better terrain stability 
Since the elasticity of the blades themselves and 
attachment point of the blades plays a function of suspension, 
a suspension effect for stabilizing the vehicle body posture is 
provided. The fixed grouser does not provide this effect. 
 
?Better terrain adaptability 
The crawler vehicle can travel at fragile rough terrain because 
the crawler belts are distributed along the contact pressure 
and the grousers generate the advanced force. However, if 
rigid fixed grousers are extended for improving the 
performance when passing over steps, then the vehicle cannot 
pass on the fragile rough terrain because the crawler belts do 
not contact the ground and the grousers break the ground. 
Even with long blades, the vehicle with blade–type crawler 
can travel on fragile rough terrain  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) Large wheel or rigid grouser (b) Blade-type 
 
Fig. 2 Comparison of the traveling on the step 
 
because the flexible blades distribute the contact pressure 
during slow speed movements [8]. 
 
Thus, adding the blade-type crawler provide advantages 
that cannot be obtained by extending the rigid fixed grouser. 
B.  Step mobility by the blade-type crawler  
The blade-type crawler climbs over steps by lifting the 
vehicle with the blades on the rear ends, as shown in Fig. 2 (b). 
The lifting effect when the vehicle with the blade-type crawler 
climb over steps was studied. In general, for a crawler to be 
able to climb over steps, the center of gravity of the vehicle 
must be above the extended line of the vertical wall of the step. 
The model shown in Fig. 3 was used. It is assumed that the 
blades can flex in a direction tangential to the wheel. Here, h is 
the height of the step, L
G
 is the distance from the center of 
gravity to the center of the rear wheel, r is the radius of the rear 
wheel, H
G
 is the height of the center of gravity, a is the angle 
of inclination of the vehicle, and l is the length of the blade. 
The blade can lift the vehicle to a maximum height of h
b
, 
which can be determined using Eq. (1). 
 
             
(1)
 
 
The x
-
coordinate of the center of gravity, x
G
, is expressed 
using Eq. (2). 
 
  (2) 
 
To enable movement over the step, the center of gravity of 
the x-coordinate should be negative, and therefore, Eq. (2) 
can be rearranged to formulate Eq. 3, with x
G
 = 0. 
 
   (3) 
 
The height of a step that can be overcome is obtained using 
this equation. The lifting height, h
b
, of the rear wheels can be 
calculated using Eq. (1). 
 
Fig. 3 Blade-type crawler moving over a step 
 
h
h
h
Tumbling
h
r r h ? ? ?
2 2
b
?
? ?
?
?
?
sin cos
2
tan cos
tan
G G
2 2
G
H r L
r r h
x ? ? ?
? ? ?
?
?
r r H r L h ? ? ? ? ? ?
2 2
G G
tan sin sin
2
tan sin ? ? ? ?
?
?
H
G
L
G
h
x
y
r
?
?
h
b
O
807
  
 
Table 1: Parameter 
settings 
 
 
Fig. 4: Height of the climbed steps 
 
 
Fig. 5 Wharf roach 
 
The potential overcoming height in case of an ordinary 
crawler and the one of a blade-type crawler, as well as the 
relationship between the angles of inclination of the vehicle 
with the respective overcoming heights are shown in Fig. 4. 
Table 1 lists the values for the vehicle parameters. The height 
of steps that can be climbed over increased in case of the 
blade-type crawler and it was confirmed that to enable 
climbing steps of the same height, the angle of inclination of 
the vehicle can be reduced. The height limit of the steps, in 
case of a blade-type crawler with blade length 75 m is about 
150 mm, and in case of no blades, the height limit of the steps 
is 110 mm, which is an increase of about 36 % from the 
former case. Furthermore, it was confirmed that without 
employing any dynamic variable functions, such as 
sub-crawlers, blade-type crawlers with a total length of about 
430 mm can climb over steps with height of about 150 mm, 
wherein the height is about 35 % of the overall length of the 
blade and 115 % of the diameter of the wheel. 
 
III. SMALL TYPE BLADE-TYPE CRAWLER VEHICLE 
A.  Bio Inspired from Wharf roach 
Unexpectedly, the author encountered and watched a 
valuable race at the rocky coast of Yakushima island of Japan. 
It was a state where a race of a wharf roach (Fig. 5) and a roach 
aimed the same goal. The author was amazed of how the 
wharf roach won a sweeping victory from the roach. 
Observing the detail of the wharf roach movement, two 
features were found. 
The first feature is that the wharf roach intensively traveled 
straightly instead of turning with large radius as follows: 
Quickly straight traveling, sudden stop after running a certain 
distance or if there was an obstacle, pivot turn (turn in short 
distance), and straight traveling towards the goal. This is close 
to the phenomena that occur when race cars of different sizes 
run in the same circuit. 
As in the Fig. 6, in the same circuit, the section of straight 
running is increase, and the section of turning is decrease by  
 
Fig. 6  The route different according to vehicle size 
the smaller vehicle. Inevitably, the number of times of turning 
is reduced. The second feature is that the wharf roach has long 
strong two antennas in each front and rear. The antennas were 
seemed to play not only to searching the terrain, but also used 
for multi roles, such as outriggers to keep the posture and as a 
sub crawler introduced in previous sections when overcoming 
steps. 
The authors were inspired from the two features of wharf 
roach: intensive straight traveling and multipurpose antennas. 
Firstly, to enhance the performance of over rough terrain, 
the blade-type crawler, which operated continuously as 
multi-leg of wharf roach and roach, is installed. The 
blade-type crawler will be specialized in straight traveling in 
response to an increase of the straight traveling section due to 
vehicle size reduction. Secondly, in order to improve the 
performance degradation of over rough terrain due to size 
reduction, adding the multipurpose antenna mechanism. In 
addition, this antenna will achieve other multi roles by low 
degrees of freedom (actuator). Such a configuration was 
expected to achieve same effect of blade-type crawler in small 
blade-type crawler vehicle. In other words, it is expected to 
achieve both the performance of over rough terrain and high 
speed performance at the same time of having low degrees of 
freedoms. 
B. Division of task in the direction change and straight 
We designed a new blade-type crawler mechanism to 
specialize straight running by high speed. Normally, the 
crawler vehicle has two actuators (or transmission) to conduct 
turn or pivot turn by giving a different rotation for the left and 
right crawlers. In this case, if we want to provide the same 
performance by electric motors, two motors and two motor 
drivers, and more two gear box are required. It needs extra 
weight and space. In order to improve the efficiency and speed 
of straight traveling which was frequently used, we install 
synchronous drive of the left and right crawlers. In this 
method, one large motor provides high speed straight traveling. 
Turning is provided by utilizing multipurpose antenna that 
will be described in the next section? 
C. Multipurpose Antennas 
We developed the antenna mechanism which has multi 
roles as the antennas of the wharf roach. The roles of the 
antenna mechanism are as follows : 1):Supporting over step, 
2)?Turning? 
Once this function is achieved, we examined the antenna 
mechanism to enhance other roles to provide versatility in the 
small vehicle. 
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0 30 60
Vehicle angle ? [°] 
h [mm] 
Crawler
Blade – type Crawler
L
G
150 mm
r 65 mm
H
G
30 mm
l 75 mm
Antenna legs
Antenna
Direction change in short-range
808
  
The developed multipurpose antenna is as shown in Fig. 5?
The multipurpose antennas are mounted to be rotated parallel 
to the roll axis of the vehicle as in Fig. 5 (1). Both right and left 
antennas rotate infinitely clockwise and counter clockwise 
independently? 
 
1)?Traveling on the steps 
It is expected to support the movement during the step by 
setting the angle of the antenna mechanism as in Fig. 7 (1). 
 
2)?Turning 
Turning is conducted by tilting the vehicle body or floating 
a crawler from one of the sides by pushing the ground with the 
antennas as in Fig. 7 (2). 
 
3)?Narrow terrain movement 
In case of moving in narrow terrains, the overall height of 
the vehicle poised low by setting the antenna horizontally as 
in Fig. 7 (3). 
 
4)? Lateral movement 
The vehicle travels to lateral direction (across the direction 
 
 
(1) Mode 1 (basic) 
 
  
(2) Mode 2 
 
(4) Mode 4 
  
(3) Mode 3 (5) Mode 5 
Fig. 7 Move modes 
 
 
(a) Same phase 
 
(b) Opposite phase 
 
Fig. 8 Lateral traveling 
 
(a) Jumping over the  groove 
 
(b) Landing 
Fig. 9 Jump and Landing 
 
 
Fig. 10 Direction change with roller 
 
5)?Jumping over the groove 
It is expected that the vehicle jumps the groove which 
length is longer than its length by rotating the antennas and 
kicking the ground during the running as in Fig. 9 (a). 
 
6)?Landing 
When the vehicle gets off from a high step, the posture 
change of the antennas is as in Fig. 9 (b). During landing, it is 
expected to reduce the fall distance and work as a shock 
absorber. 
 
It should not merely mimic the biological, but it is also 
necessary to add new element based on the understanding of 
its features. 
Hence, we tried an extension by installing the rollers 
which rotate passively in the antenna tips. It is expect the 
following enhancements. 
 
7)?Skating 
The vehicle can skate in the hills or during the running by 
supporting its body with rollers as in Fig. 7 (5). 
 
8)?Direction changing with roller 
The vehicle can change direction smoothly by deploying 
antenna mechanisms with left and right rollers when it crashed 
into a wall or obstacle as in Fig. 10. 
 
As described above, using the multipurpose antennas with 2 
degrees of freedom inspired from the wharf roach, the vehicle 
is expected to perform 9 types (Normal traveling + 8 types of 
movement forms by multipurpose antennas) of movement 
forms. 
 
 
IV. DEVELOPMENT OF KEIOS-I 
In this section, we develop the prototype model named 
“KEIOS-I” which has the blade-type crawler and the 
multipurpose antennas. The KEIOS-I is designed according 
to the section 3. 
Roller
Blade-Type Crawler
Kicking the ground by antennas
809
  
 
Fig. 11 Overview of the KEIOS-I and its specification 
 
The KEIOS-I is shown in Fig. 11. The total length is 265 
mm and crawler section length is 115 mm. The blade length of 
the crawler is 15 mm and width 10 mm. The length of the 
multipurpose antennas are 75 mm and they are bent about 30 
degree to their rotation axis. As seen from the appearance, the 
vehicle has a symmetrical shape in front and rear, upper and 
down. In order to avoid to upright on the side, the side parts of 
the vehicle colored as sky blue are composed as semicircle 
cross-sectional shaped. Then, the driving methods of the 
blade-type crawler and multipurpose antennas are explained. 
As shown in Fig. 12 (a), the drive wheels which are 
synchronous right and left are driven by a brushless motor. 7.4 
V ? 300 mAh lithium polymer battery is mounted on the 
bottom of the vehicle body. The max output of the vehicle is 
64 W. Reduction ratio is 16.25 : 1. The RC servos that rotate 
the multipurpose antennas are mounted right and left side 
between the front and rear crawler wheels as shown in Fig. 12 
(b). The antennas are capable of infinite rotation by the RC 
servos. The antennas are made of 1.8 mm diameter piano wire 
and possible to be elastically deformed. In the future, the 
multipurpose antenna will be made by leaf spring to get the 
anisotropic elastic. Furthermore, the torque limiter mechanism 
which holds the appropriate friction between the antenna and 
gear prevents damages of the servo motor or gears when large 
torques are applied with respect to the rotation direction of the 
antennas. Finally, we explain about the blade-type crawler of 
the KEIOS-I. The crawler belts are arranged on the left and 
right sides of the vehicle and 12 sheets of the blades attach at 
25 mm intervals to one crawler as in Fig. 12 (c). The blades 
that are rubber plate with 1 mm thickness are connected by 
adhesion to the crawlers, the postures of the blades are held by 
their elasticity. The tip of the blade is cut at an angle as shown 
in Fig.12 (c) and it is devised to capture the ground like spike 
shoes. The number of blades, material and shape of the 
KEIOS-I are determined in a qualitative judgment based on 
heuristics with the past blade-type crawler vehicles. 
 
V. EXPERIMENT 
In section 3, it is introduced the performance expected by 
the combination of the blade-type crawler and the 
multipurpose antenna. In this section, we will confirm that 
multi movement forms are performed.  
A. Running and Turning 
The basic driving performances of the KEIOS-I by the 
blade-type crawler are presented as follows: 
 
(a) Drive system of the KEIOS-I 
 
 
(b) Multipurpose antenna 
 
 
(c) Blade- type crawler of the KEIOS-I 
 
Fig. 12 Mechanism of the KEIOS-I 
?Maximum speed 
The maximum speed of the KEIOS-I was calculated by 
measuring the time when it ran 3 m straightly. The vehicle 
reached the top speed at about 0.4 m and ran 2.6 m with 1.24 
sec with top speed. Therefore, maximum speed is about 2.1 
m/s. 
 
?Floating height and Low steps movement 
The floating height at the slow speed (0.5 m/s) and top 
speed (2.1 m/s) were measured from video movies during 
running. The floating height at slow speed was about 6 mm as 
in Fig. 13 (a). The floating height at top speed was also about 
6 mm as in Fig. 13 (b). However, the front wheel center 
height at top speed was about 22 mm and higher than at slow 
speed. This height increase is directly linked to performance 
improvement of rough terrain. We conducted the following 
experiments as an example of the stability during traveling 
low steps. In the Fig. 14, the vehicle was moving at 0.5 m/s on 
low steps with 3 mm height and located at 80 mm intervals. 
As shown in Fig. 14 (a), the height change and pitching 
movement of the vehicle were very small. In addition, as 
shown in Fig. 14 (b), the direction of the vehicle did not 
change even though moving on steps without suspension 
system and steering system. 
Size L ? W ?H [ mm ] 265? 99 ? 26
Mass [ g ] 255
Degree of Freedom 3
Blade-Type Crawler
Gear reducer
Gear for rotating of antenna
Drive Wheel
Motor
Motor driver
Receiver
Multipurpose antenna
Rubber bush
Driven gear
25 mm
5 mm
15 mm
10 mm
810
  
 
(a) At 0.5 m/s 
 
(b) At 2.1 m/s 
Fig. 13 Floating height 
 
(a) The side view 
 
(b) The bird’s-eye view 
Fig. 14 Traveling on low steps at 0.5 m/s 
 
?The maximum climbing angle of slope 
It was measured the angle of the slope which the vehicle 
can climb up. The tests were conducted with 5 ° increments 
slope angle from 20 ° until the vehicle cannot climb up. The 
slop surface is enough to climb. In the result, the vehicle 
could climb up to 35 degrees. 
?Turning 
The way of turning changed by the antenna was 
experimented. As shown in Fig. 15, smooth turning was 
conducted. 
B. Lateral traveling 
The lateral movement by the multipurpose antennas were 
experimented. 
?The lateral movement at opposite phase 
The opposite phase movement was conducted as shown in 
Fig. 16. The moving speed was insufficient. We considered 
the cause was the insufficient grip of the rollers. It is planned 
to improve by adding rubbers of semi-circular cup shape on 
the rollers. 
?The lateral movement at  same phase 
The same phase movement was conducted. The movement 
was succeed, however the moving speed was insufficient and 
the phase of antennas was changed during the movement. The 
reason is assumed to be a torque limiter of the antenna 
rotating. 
 
 
Fig. 15 Turning by the multipurpose antenna 
 
 
 
Fig. 16 The lateral traveling by the multipurpose antennas 
 
 
 
Fig. 17 Traveling on the 90 mm height step 
 
While lateral movement in the same phase, the torque of the 
antenna rotating axes were over the torque limiter and phase 
was changed. Since this vehicle was a prototype, the torque 
limiters were achieved by friction retention. To achieve this 
with elastic elements, such as the torsion bar spring, it will be 
solved by the displacement of the antenna phase. 
 
C. Traveling on the high step with multipurpose antenna 
We verified the effect of the multipurpose antennas to 
support movements on a high step. The tests were conducted 
with two conditions with and without antennas. In the results 
shown in Fig. 17, in case of without the antennas, the vehicle 
climbed up to a 25 mm height step. In case of with antennas, 
up to 90 mm height with 2.1 m/s of the vehicle speed at the 
front of the step. From this result, the vehicle with the 
multipurpose antennas could climb 3.6 times a higher step 
than without the antennas. In other words, the KEIOS-I can 
climb up to 3.5 times its own height. 
 
6 mm
19 mm
6 mm
22 mm
1.6 deg
3mm height
1.4 deg
3mm height
80mm
1
2
3
4
5
6
90mm
811
  
 
Fig. 18 Jumping over the groove 
 
 
(a) The side view of switching to skating from traveling 
 
 
 (b) Turning during skating 
Fig. 19 Skating 
D. Jumping over the groove and Landing 
?Jumping over the groove 
It was verified the widest groove that the vehicle can jump 
over by moving the antennas as in Fig. 9 (a) at maximum 
speed. The vehicle can jump over without the antenna 
rotation up to 155 mm groove length. 
The jumping length of the grove with the antenna rotation 
was expected up to 248 mm from the relationship shown in 
Fig. 18, however, it was not succeeded. The assumed reason 
was that the traveling speed was decreased by friction of the 
roller side, acting as a brake when kicking the ground. From 
this result, the vehicle was jumping over a 155 mm groove.  
?Landing 
The vehicle was tested landing from 730 mm height table. 
The KEIOS-I can get off up to 28 times its own height. 
However, the landing way was not as in Fig. 9 (b). The 
vehicle prototype did not land with the four rollers of the 
antennas because it has not a posture sensor. However, the 
vehicle did not break after 40 times landing from the table to 
the concrete floor because the antennas absorbed the shock. 
E. Skating 
We verified the skating by using rollers of the 
multipurpose antenas In Fig. 19 (a), it was the case of 
swtiching to the skating form while moving by the crawler. In 
Fig. 19 (b), it was turning by the rollers. Hence, the KEIOS-I 
achieved an efficiently move on slope and smooth surface by 
skating with rollers. 
VI. CONCLUSION 
This paper presented the KEIOS-I as a small unmanned 
vehicle to aim high performance over rough terrain and high 
speed movements inspired on a wharf roach. The following 
conclusions were achieved: 
 
1. KEIOS-1 provides 9 movement forms by using 3 
degrees of freedom of the blade-type crawlers and the 
multipurpose antennas.  
 
2. The maximum speed is 2.1 m /s. 
 
3. Lateral movement was performed by multipurpose 
antennas. 
 
4. High speed and stable movement on low steps by 
floating 6 mm from the ground.  
 
5. Climb up 35 degree slopes. 
 
6. Moving on steps 3.5 times higher than the height of the 
vehicle body. 
 
7. Jumping over 155 mm length grooves. 
 
8. Getting off from high steps 28 times higher than the 
height of the vehicle body. 
 
Thus, the KEIOS-I achieved compatibility with high 
performance over rough terrains and high speed movements 
in spite of being a small vehicle. 
In the future, we plan to challenge the followings: To 
continue skating with roller by rowing in the antennas, the 
attaching methods of the rollers will be devised. Adding the 
floats to the tops of the antennas and thrusting by the 
crawler’s blades, moving above the water surface. It is 
expected to enhance the stability by floating higher by 
attaching the wings to the antennas. In this way, we try to 
achieve high performance with low degrees of freedom. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Odedra, S. D. Prior, and M. Karamanoglu, Investigating the 
Mobility of Unmanned Ground Vehicles, Proceedings of 
International Conference on Manufacturing and Engineering 
Systems, 2009, pp.380–385. 
[2] Bram G. A. Lambrecht, Andrew D. Horchler, and Roger D. 
Quinn, A Small, Insect-Inspired Robot that Runs and Jumps, 
Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, pp. 1240-1245. 
[3] P. Birkmeyer, K. Peterson and R. S. Fearing, DASH: A Dynamic 16g 
Hexapedal Robot, Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,(2009), pp. 2683-2689. 
[4] S. Kim, JE. Clark and MR. Cutkosky, iSprawl: Design and Tuning for 
High-Speed Autonomous Open-Loop Running, The International 
Journal of Robotics Research 2006; 25; 903. 
[5] Y. Uchida, K. Furuichi and S. Hirose, Fundamental 
Performance of 6 Wheeled off - road Vehicle “ HELIOS – V “, 
Proceedings of the 1999 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Automation, Vol.3, pp. 2336 – 2341. 
[6]  P. J. Lewis, Dr. N. Flann, M. R. Torrie E. A. Poulson, and T. 
Petroff, Chaos an Intelligent Ultra-Mobile SUGV: Combining 
the Mobility of Wheels, Tracks, and Legs, Proceedings of SPIE, 
Vol.5804, 2005, pp.427–438. 
[7] T. Iwamoto, H. Yamamoto, K. Honma, M. Fujie and Y. 
Nakano, Mechanism and Control of Transformable Crawler 
Vehicle with Active Adaptability to Terrain Variations, Journal 
of the Robotics Society of Japan, Vol.2, No.3, 1984, pp.200–
208.  
[8] Y. Yamada, R. Yokoto and R. Higashi, Blade-Type Crawler 
Belt Mechanism for High-Speed Movement of Micro 
Unmanned Ground Vehicles in Rough Terrain, The Robotics 
and Mechatronics Conference 2013, pp.2P1-R14. 
2.1 m/s
40mm
58 mm
190 mm
248 mm
1 2 3
812
