  
  
Abstract— While there has been a steady progression of 
research in robotic and mechatronic systems that utilize nickel 
titanium alloy (Nitinol) as an actuator, the design of the 
antagonistic element for the inherently “one-way” technology 
has not been thoroughly investigated and described. In this 
paper, we discuss the properties of Nitinol-based shape memory 
alloy actuators as they relate to the design of passive spring 
antagonists. We describe the major classes of design goals as 
they relate to the choice of properties of the antagonistic 
element, and present techniques for optimizing parallel 
antagonists through passive linear springs in order to maximize 
the generally most desirable property of the actuator - the 
maximal repeatable strain of the antagonist pair.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
Active material actuators, where applied control signals 
and power lead to developed force and/or strain across the 
material, are desirable for a number of reasons. Unlike 
devices that are comprised of heterogeneous parts, material 
actuators are not assemblies (in contrast to common Lorentz 
force actuators, for example, which generally require 
bearings, magnets, and a physical or electronic means of 
commutation between coils) and so more easily lend 
themselves to miniaturization. Adding further to the 
simplicity, the powering schemes generally involve simple 
application of current (such as Joule heating) in order to 
reach a phase-change point in the material. Of the existing 
options, which include electroactive polymers [1] and 
piezoelectric materials [2], nickel titanium alloys (Nitinol) 
show the largest achievable strain and greatest durability of 
material actuators [3]. Therefore, despite its limitations in 
terms of thermodynamic inefficiencies and achievable 
bandwidth, Nitinol has been the most commonly used 
material actuator in robotics research. 
One of the drawbacks of Nitinol SMA as an actuator is its 
inherently unidirectional action. When heated to initiate the 
shape-memory effect, the material will remain in that 
configuration until it is mechanically strained. Considering 
that nearly all actuation applications would require more than 
“one-off” single use of the material, some type of antagonist 
actuation must be provided. This is generally done with either 
a second SMA element (e.g. [4–7]), or with passive 
mechanical springs, which can be placed either in series (e.g. 
[8], [9]) or parallel (e.g. [10]) with the active element.  
In this paper, we describe the considerations involved in 
designing a Nitinol/passive spring antagonist pair in which 
 
Research supported by United States Air Force Office of Scientific 
Research under Grant #FA9550-11-1-0093. 
J. P. Swensen and A.M. Dollar are with the Department of Mechanical 
Engineering and Materials Science, Yale University, New Haven, CT 
06511 USA (phone: 203-432-3195; fax: 203-432-6775; e-mail: 
john.swensen; aaron.dollar@yale.edu). 
the spring is placed in parallel, for the purposes of 
maximizing the achievable strain that can be repeatedly 
obtained during actuation. Optimization of the Nitinol 
mechanism requires both an understanding the kinematics of 
the mechanism structure, as well as the material properties of 
the constituent components. This paper aims to present a 
complete picture of the parameters available to the designer 
and how these choices affect the basic functionality of the 
device. In particular, the equilibrium between the SMA 
element and the antagonist spring must be considered, which 
is made challenging due to the fact that the stiffness of the 
Nitinol component cannot be modeled as a simple linear 
spring: the internal stiffness changes as the metal is heated 
and the crystalline lattice of the alloy is varied from fully-
martensitic to fully-austenitic. 
The most common configuration of linear Nitinol devices 
includes a Nitinol element (either straight wire or coiled 
“spring”) in series with a bias/return spring. Series 
mechanisms are attractive because both elastic elements are 
generally in tension at all times. However, the length of the 
pair will be fairly long to achieve a specific force, 
recoverable strain, and stiffness property [11]. An 
antagonistic spring in parallel, alternatively, allows for a 
much more compact system. However, it requires 
consideration of other important issues, such as buckling, to 
be explained more fully later.  
While a fairly large number of research projects have 
implemented passive springs as antagonists for SMA 
elements, they have nearly always done so without 
substantial justification for the associated design choices. The 
most relevant work along those lines involves a discussion of 
the optimization of the SMA element for a given antagonist 
series spring. This paper, alternatively, focuses on the 
analysis and optimization method for choosing the properties 
of an antagonistic spring, including rest-length, spring 
constant, diameter, etc., placed in parallel with a given SMA 
element, with the goal of optimizing the repeatable strain of 
the actuator pair.  
Optimization of Parallel Spring Antagonists for Nitinol Shape 
Memory Alloy Actuators 
John P. Swensen, Member, IEEE, and Aaron M. Dollar, Senior Member, IEEE 
 
Figure 1. Types of linear Nitinol mechanisms 
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6345
  
 
Figure 2: SMA activation cycle 
 
 
We begin the remaining portion of this paper with a 
description of the basic mechanical properties of Nitinol as it 
changes phase to create a strain, followed by an introduction 
to the desired properties in an antagonist (section II). We then 
describe the details of the considerations involved in 
optimizing an antagonist spring placed in parallel with the 
NiTi element, including discussing the role of the 
geometrical properties of the SMA and the spring, for the 
purposes of maximizing the achievable repeatable strain of 
the system (section III). Finally, we present conclusions and 
future work extensions of the work presented here (section 
IV).  
II. NITINOL SMA ACTUATOR PROPERTIES 
In order to be able to describe the requirements for the 
design of a mechanical spring antagonist, we must first lay 
out the relevant mechanical properties of the active Nitinol 
actuator element. We begin by describing the basic material 
and mechanical properties of the alloy (section II.A.), then 
describe the primary ways in which an antagonist can bias 
the behavior of the active element system (II.B.), and 
conclude with a discussion of the effects that a popular 
strain-magnifying form factor of the NiTi (coiled “springs”) 
affects the element properties (II.C.) 
A. Basic Mechanical Properties of Nitinol 
When Nitinol is used as an actuator, which is its most 
common use in the robotics literature, systems are exploiting 
the shape memory effect of Nickel Titanium (NiTi) Shape 
Memory Alloys (SMA). SMAs have the distinct advantage of 
being highly compact and requiring little overhead in drive 
electronics, and the direct electrical interfacing and ease of 
integration makes them attractive for many applications, 
specifically when simplicity and small size is prioritized. 
NiTi, the most widely-available SMA, can develop high 
stresses (approximately 100 MPa in the martensitic phase and 
560 MPa in the austenitic phase) in wires of less than 0.5 mm 
thickness [12]. Conversely, many other active material 
actuators, such as electro-active polymers and piezoelectric 
cells, allow either limited stresses or very low achievable 
strains, making them less suitable for widespread use in a 
wide range of applications. Furthermore, NiTi is durable and 
inexpensive, in addition to its ability to achieve large strains 
when heated. 
NiTi shape memory alloys have their own inherent 
limitations, however. The mechanism by which they actuate 
stems from a phase change phenomenon in which the 
crystalline lattice of the metal transitions from austenitic 
structure to martensitic structure on cooling.  Heating causes 
the crystalline domains to transition to the more compact 
austenitic lattice form, inducing a strain in the material. In 
commercial NiTi SMAs, this strain is currently limited to 
approximately 4% for straight drawn wire in tension. 
Additionally, SMA is a unidirectional actuator – an external 
restoring stress must be applied to strain it to its detwinned 
state. The SMA must then be heated to revert back the more-
dense austenitic lattice (see Fig. 2). Despite these limitations, 
however, it is the most reasonable option for many robotics 
applications. 
B. Bias forces for One-Way Nitinol Elements 
Similar to the way in which an active antagonist can be 
controlled in order to modulate the impedance characteristics 
of the actuator, the properties of the antagonist spring can be 
chosen in order to give a variety of behaviors. We categorize 
these into “constant force”, strain-optimized, and stiffness-
optimized antagonist springs (Fig. 3).  
In the first of these categories, a constant-force spring or 
biasing element is used. Fig. 3A (left) shows the 
force/deflection curves of the martensitic (light blue) and 
austenitic (dark blue) phases of the NiTi element, with a 
constant force bias shown in turquoise. While a constant-
force element would theoretically allow for the largest net 
strain of an SMA actuator (taken as the difference in the 
horizontal axis intercepts between the antagonist element and 
the martensitic and austenitic NiTi phases), it is very difficult 
to implement in practice. Constant force springs, such as 
those used to power mechanical watches, generally take up a 
large amount of physical space and are limited to fairly small 
forces. Another option would be through the use of a load 
mass, such as used in mechanical clocks. The negatives there 
are obvious, including the variation with orientation with 
respect to gravity, travel limits in the coupling of the mass to 
the mechanism, as well as the net added mass and size to the 
 
Figure 3. One-way Nitinol element can be biased by constant forces, linear springs, or non-linear elements. Shown here are biasing forces that optimize 
strain with a constant force (A), optimize strain with a linear spring (B), and optimize strain variability with a linear spring (C).  
6346
  
 
Figure 4: SMA cell stiffness tuning through spring geometry. 
 
system.  
The second major option is the implementation of a linear 
spring (with a constant, non-zero force/deflection curve), as 
shown in Fig. 3B. All mechanical springs will have a certain 
amount of deflection associated with an applied force. The 
idea with this option would be to find a spring with as low 
stiffness as possible while allowing for the desired deflection, 
which puts an upper limit on the practical stiffness due to the 
yield strength properties of the spring material (typically a 
steel formulation). Designs of this type will maximize the 
repeatable strain of the antagonistic pair, which is the goal of 
the proposed work.  
The last class of passive antagonist seeks to maximize the 
stiffness variation in the stiffness (Fig. 3C). While not 
addressed in this paper, this concept rest upon the ability to 
maximize the difference in stiffness between martensitic and 
austenitic phases of the SMA element. Since the spring and 
active element are in parallel, the best designs involve the 
choice of springs that are impedance-matched to mean 
stiffness of the Nitinol phases.  
C. Nitinol Coil Characteristics 
The typical form-factor for commercial Nitinol is simple 
extruded wire. While this gives the largest attainable force, 
commercial straight-drawn Nitinol wire has a maximum 
recoverable strain limit of approximately 4%. However, 
similar to the way that a typical gear-based transmission can 
trade off torque for speed of an electric motor, a greater 
amount of strain can be attained by coiling the wire, trading 
off applied force for increased strain.  
We have been able to achieve linear strains of over 20% 
with coiled NiTi elements by “training” them such that their 
memory shape is in the form of a linear coil. In doing so, we 
can vary the contractile properties of the system by altering 
the geometry of the coil. Given a specific Nitinol alloy 
chemistry, the spring stiffness is proportional to the wire 
diameter and inversely proportional to the number of turns 
and the coil diameter. Fig. 4 shows an example coil, where d 
is the Nitinol wire thickness, D is the mean diameter of each 
coil, and N is the number of turns in the coil.  
The effective “spring constant” of the Nitinol coil is a 
function of those parameters and the shear  modulus G of the 
Nitinol in each phase. It will have two different shear moduli, 
G_A and G_M, while in the fully-austenitic and fully-
martensitic crystal phases, respectively, and will vary 
between those during phase changes. The contractile and 
stiffness properties of the coil can therefore be controlled and 
tailored to the needs of a specific application by varying d, D, 
and N.  
The stiffness model shown in Fig. 4 does not fully capture 
the contractile behavior of NiTi actuator coils, however, due 
in part to the material property variations with the phase 
change spectrum of the material, as well as to geometric 
effects from the coil form factor. As a result, a more 
complete analytical model [7] or experimental determination 
of the true mechanical behavior of a specific material 
chemistry and form factor (e.g. Fig. 5) might be used in the 
design optimization. 
III. PARALLEL SPRING OPTIMIZATION  
To optimize a bias spring (namely its rest length and 
spring constant) in order to maximize the amount of travel for 
a parallel mechanism, the designer must know several 
parameters and limitation of the mechanism under 
consideration. First, the limits of travel of the mechanism are 
critical, including the smallest amount of compression the 
device can make as well as the maximum extension. Often 
times the device will have physical stops that prevent the 
mechanism from traveling beyond the allowable bounds, but 
these limits are still important for computing the spring 
length and stiffness that maximizes travel. It also provides an 
upper bound on the percentage compression the bias spring 
will make. Second, the largest allowable diameter of the bias 
spring will play a role in determining the maximum length of 
the bias spring before buckling occurs, in conjunction with 
the percentage compression. The final consideration in 
finding the ideal bias spring is to find commercially available 
springs that satisfy the length and stiffness criteria. The 
optimization steps are performed as follows: 
A) Characterize the Nitinol shape memory element by 
theoretically or experimentally identifying an 
analytical form for the force-displacement curves of 
the fully-austenitic and fully-martensitic phases 
(similar to those found in Figure 5) 
B) Determine the maximum Nitinol extension before 
permanent plastic deformation will begin and the 
maximum stable bias spring length for the spring 
diameter and desired deflection. 
 
Figure 5. Force-displacement characteristics of a Nitinol spring, in 
contrast to that of straight drawn wire shown in Fig. 3. 
6347
  
C) Compute the points at which the spring curve 
intersects the martensitic and austenitic force curves 
as a function of the bias spring rest length and 
spring constant. 
D) Finally, perform a constrained optimization where 
the objective function is the difference in static two 
static equilibriums with the constraints for the spring 
length and the martensitic equilibrium determined in 
(B). 
A simple form of the static equilibrium configurations can 
be derived when modeling the Nitinol coils as linear springs, 
where the equilibrium solutions are 
Austenite equilibrium ?
!"#
+?
!
?
!
???
!
+?
!
?
!
??
!
= 0 (1) 
Martensite equilibrium ?
!"#
+?
!
?
!
???
!
+?
!
?
!
??
!
= 0, 
and the optimum bias spring is computed as 
?
!
?
,?
!
?
= argmax
  !
!
,!
!
?
!
??
!
. 
Here, ?
!"#
 is any externally applied load on the device, ?
!
 is 
the spring constant of the bias spring, ?
!
 is the spring 
constant of the Nitinol when in the Austenite phase, ?
!
 is the 
spring constant of the Nitinol when in the Martensite phase, 
??
!
 is the rest length of the bias spring, ?
!
 is the memory rest 
length of the Nitinol spring, and ?
!
 and ?
!
 are the Austenite 
and Martensite equilibrium displacement with respect to the 
memory rest length of the Nitinol spring. 
In many respects, a constant force spring would be the 
ideal bias spring for maximizing displacement, though such 
springs are often not available at such small scales and they 
often have a low number of allowable cycles before failure.  
In Fig. 6 (bottom), we show we see the Austenite (green) 
and Martensite (yellow) stiffness curves from fitted data. Fig. 
6 (top) show that for each length, there is a distinct optimum 
stiffness of the bias spring. These optimum values are plotted 
in the corresponding color in Fig. 6 (bottom). Note that in 
this figure, we have not enforced any of the constraints given 
in Step B above. As such, the optimal spring constant is 
nearly the same for all of the spring lengths demonstrated. If 
there had been a constraint to prevent permanent plastic 
deformation, the longer springs would have necessarily been 
of lower stiffness to avoid over-straining the Nitinol coil. 
Finally, in Fig. 7 and 8 we demonstrate the process of 
optimizing a bias spring for one of our manufactured coils. 
Fig. 7 is a graphical depiction of the spring buckling 
contraints that must be followed to ensure that the parallel 
bias spring does not buckle when the Nitinol transitions from 
the martensitic to austenitic phases. This particular design 
parameter is not present in a Nitinol actuator design where 
the bias spring is in parallel with the Nitinol element because 
the bias spring is always in tension. The advantage of a 
design utilizing a parallel bias spring is that the length of the 
device can be made much more compact, at the expense of 
ensuring the device is wide enough to meet the necessary 
spring rest length to spring diameter criteria shown as the X-
axis in Fig. 7. 
 Fig. 8 (top) shows both the force-displacement 
characterization of the coil in the Austenitic phase (red) and 
the Martensitic phase (yellow). The Martensitic 
characterization was conducting by sequences of stress and 
release steps to identify the point at which permanent plastic 
deformation begins. With this set of coils that were 16 mm 
long, permanent plastic deformation begins after approx. 14 
mm of strain. This bias spring was selected from 
commercially available low-pressure springs available from 
 
Figure 6. Optimizing the stroke length over stiffness for three lengths 
of bias spring (top). As expected, the total stroke length increases as the 
spring length increases. The optimal spring stiffness marked with a star 
on top is then plotted (bottom) for each spring length, where the 
Austenite stiffness (green) and the Martensite stiffness (yellow) are 
fitted from data from real devices we have made. The equilibrium 
displacement length for the three different bias spring lengths are 
indicated in the same color as the spring stiffness curve at the points 
where the spring stiffness curves cross the martensitic and austenitic 
Nitinol stiffness curves. 
 
Figure 7. The stability of the bias spring in terms of the spring length, 
the spring diameter, and the amount of deflection. 
 
6348
  
Lee Spring (Lee Spring Ltd, Wokingham, England). In Fig. 8 
(bottom ), we plot the optimal length and stiffness for a 50 
mm spring and the curves for the entire Lee Spring LP series 
springs. As a spring is cut down, its spring constant will 
increase, such that the stiffness will increase inversely 
proportional to the change in length. Here we see that there is 
a low pressure spring than nearly matches the optimal 
parameters, namely model LP 026GH 06S316 being trimmed 
to the 50 mm length. Some manufacturers sell cut-to-length 
springs where they specify a spring rate where the spring 
constant is given as the spring rate time the length. 
 These steps of identifying the Nitinol characteristics, 
delineating the constraints provided by the mechanism 
design, solving the constrained optimization for the length 
and spring constant, and finally finding a commercial spring 
that either satisfies or can be made to satisfy the optimal 
characteristic provides a straightforward method of quickly 
designing one-way Nitinol coil mechanisms. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we described the analysis and procedure for 
designing a compact Nitinol-based SMA actuator utilizing a 
passive linear spring in parallel with the active element. We 
examine the active force/deflection behaviors of the two 
material phases (martensite and austenite), as well as 
describe the net behavior of common coiled NiTi wire as it 
relates to the choice of antagonist. The parallel architecture 
is more challenging to analyze due to the fact that the force 
on the two components is not explicitly equal and that the 
buckling of the elements must be considered, but is much 
more compact than the more common linear arrangement. 
  
In terms of future work, the immediate extension is the 
consideration of the design of the antagonist pairs for the 
purposes of maximizing the stiffness variation of the 
actuator module between phases. While the representative 
plot shown in Fig. 3C shows the basic idea, the magnitude of 
the variation in stiffness is a complicated function of the 
stress/strain behavior of the SMA element (including 
implemented geometric considerations such as coiling) as 
well as how the intercepts of those curves with the passive 
spring element can be varied with slope (i.e. stiffness) and 
intercept (i.e. pre-load).  
V. REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Bar-Cohen, Ed., Electroactive Polymer (EAP) Actuators as 
Artificial Muscles: Reality, Potential, and Challenges, Second 
Edition. 1000 20th Street, Bellingham, WA 98227-0010 USA: 
SPIE, 2004. 
[2] E. F. CRAWLEY and J. DE LUIS, “Use of piezoelectric actuators 
as elements of intelligent structures,” AIAA Journal, vol. 25, no. 
10, pp. 1373–1385, Oct. 1987. 
[3] S. W. R. R. Pelton, V. Schroeder, M. R. Mitchell, X.-Y. Gong, M. 
Barney, “Fatigue and durability of Nitinol stents,” Journal of the 
mechanical behavior of biomedical materials, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 
153–164, 2008. 
[4] K. Gabriel, W. Trimmer, and J. Walker, “A micro rotary actuator 
using shape memory alloys,” Sensors and Actuators, vol. 15, pp. 
95–102, 1988. 
[5] D. J. Arbogast, R. T. Ruggeri, and R. C. Bussom, “Development 
of a ?-scale NiTinol actuator for reconfigurable structures,” 2008, 
vol. 6930, no. 2008, p. 69300L–69300L–12. 
[6] A. Jacot, R. Ruggeri, and D. Clingman, “Shape memory alloy 
device and control method,” US Patent 6,499,952, vol. 1, no. 12, 
2002. 
[7] S. Kim, E. Hawkes, K. Choy, M. Joldaz, J. Foleyz, and R. Wood, 
“Micro artificial muscle fiber using NiTi spring for soft robotics,” 
in 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots 
and Systems, 2009, pp. 2228–2234. 
[8] M. Laffranchi and N. Tsagarakis, “Antagonistic and series elastic 
actuators: a comparative analysis on the energy consumption,” 
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5678–5684, 2009. 
[9] A. Jafari, N. G. Tsagarakis, B. Vanderborght, and D. G. Caldwell, 
“A novel actuator with adjustable stiffness (AwAS),” in 2010 
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and 
Systems, 2010, pp. 4201–4206. 
[10] C. English and D. Russell, “Implementation of variable joint 
stiffness through antagonistic actuation using rolamite springs,” 
Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 27–40, 1999. 
[11] S. Degeratu, N. G. Bizdoaca, G. Manolea, I. Diaconu, A. Petrisor, 
and V. Degeratu, “On the Design of a Shape Memory Alloy 
Spring Actuator Using Thermal Analysis,” vol. 7, no. 10, pp. 
1006–1015, 2008. 
[12] “FLEXINOL® Technical and Design Data - Metric.”  
 
 
Figure 8. Bias spring optimization for experimentally characterized 
Nitinol coils used in an inchworm robot. The top shows the force-
displacement curves for the prepared Nitinol coils when in the 
Austenite phase (red) and the Martensite phase (yellow). The 
Martensite characterization consisted of cyclic straining and relaxation 
of the coil, without heating to return to the memory length. These 16 
mm coils were able to extend approximated 14 mm before permanent 
plastic deformation occurs; the characterization experiment stopped 
extending around 12 mm to prevent such damage.    
 
6349
