  
? 
Abstract— This paper introduces a novel robot which is able 
to climb hanger cables of long span suspension bridges. The 
robot has been developed for inspection purpose, and it can help 
us remotely inspect the state of cables by using cameras and 
Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) devices. The robot consists of 
two traction modules, two sub modules, and an adhesion 
mechanism. The unique design of the traction module ensures 
the stable movement of the robot on the twisted surface of the 
hanger cable. In this paper, we describe the structure and 
environmental situation of hanger cables and the mechanisms of 
the robot. Also, the results of experiments in the indoor and 
outdoor environments are included. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The maintenance of hanger cables has been a critical issue 
with the aging of suspension bridges. The visual inspection by 
a human is currently prevailing for the inspection of hanger 
cables. However, it is very dangerous and hard for the workers 
to access every position of a hanger cable because hanger 
cables are hung at main cable of very high altitude. In addition, 
it is required to inspect inside as well as outside state of a 
hanger cable for its accurate diagnosis. Non-Destructive 
Testing (NDT) is usually used for the inspection on the inside 
state. It is difficult and dangerous for a human to transport a 
NDT device because NDT devices are commonly heavy. 
Therefore, the development of a cable climbing robot capable 
of transporting NDT devices in place of a human is needed. 
In these days, various climbing robots have been reported. 
The gripper driven climbing robots using the electric motor 
and the hydraulic pressure were developed [1], [2]. A gripper 
driven climbing robot is able to move to bent object or to other 
object from original position but its climbing speed is too slow 
because there exists a lot of the operation steps only for one 
motion. The climbing robot which employs the negative 
pressure generated by the impeller as a method of making the 
adhesion force was introduced [3]. The robot is able to drive 
and rotate fast since it is driven by two independent wheels 
and a ball castor. Although the robot could be driven on a wall 
with stable adhesion force, it may be fallen from hanger cable 
because the adhesion force generated by negative pressure is 
unstable on the curved surface. The robots using the magnetic 
force were reported [4], [5]. The magnetic-based climbing 
robots are possible to drive on the pipe of large radius but 
these kinds of the robots are limited to wide object made by 
ferromagnetic substance. Also, the robots which are driven by 
wheels and adhered by springs were developed [6], [7]. In 
case of using the springs to generate adhesion force, the 
 
Kyeong Ho Cho, Young Hoon Jin, Ho Moon Kim, and Hyouk Ryeol Choi 
are with the School of Mechanical Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, 
Suwon, 440-746, Korea (corresponding author to provide phone: 
+82-31-290-7449; fax: +82-31-290-7507; e-mail: hrchoi@me.skku.ac.kr).  
adhesion force control is not required since the elastic 
restoring force of the spring is passively generated. 
Comparing with the gripper-driven robot, the moving speed of 
the wheel-driven robot is pretty fast, but their payload is not 
large enough. 
Previously, we have developed a climbing robot targeting 
the inside and outside inspection of hanger cables [8]-[10]. 
The robot called Multifunctional Robotic Crawler for Cable 
INspection (MRC
2
IN-I) consists of three identical modules, 
and modules are placed 120 degrees apart circumferentially. 
Each module has a driving unit and an adhesion unit, and the 
driving unit is composed of a driving mechanism and a 
safe-landing mechanism. The functional performances of the 
robot mechanisms about an adhesion mechanism, a driving 
mechanism, and a safe-landing mechanism were verified 
under the indoor experimental environment composed of a 
wire rope of diameter of 76.2mm. MRC2IN-I showed 
reasonable transportation capability but it was observed that 
the robot was being oscillated while driving on the hanger 
cable owing to the twisted surface of the hanger cable. It may 
be the result in the abrasion of the tire and the breakaway of 
the robot. As an advanced mechanism, the caterpillar 
mechanism was equipped to MRC2IN-I+ in place of the wheel 
and the driving stability of the robot was considerably 
improved [11], [12]. 
In this paper, we introduce a totally redesigned robot, 
called MRC2IN-II which solves the most of problems in the 
previous robots. The operating principles of the mechanisms 
are explained and the results of indoor/outdoor experiments 
are given. 
The paper is organized as follows. In the first, the 
requirements of a climbing robot for the inspection of the 
hanger cable are addressed in Section II. Section III 
introduces the mechanisms of newly developed MRC
2
IN-II. 
The performances of the robot are verified experimentally by 
Section IV. Finally, conclusions are given in Section V with 
the future works. 
II. REQUIREMENTS OF CLIMBING ROBOT FOR INSPECTION OF 
HANGER CABLES 
The diameter and length of hanger cables are different 
depending on the scale of the suspension bridge. For example, 
the ultra large span suspension bridge used to connect 
between the land and the island, especially Young-Jong 
Bridge in Republic of Korea as shown in Fig.1 (a), the 
diameter and length of the cable are up to 84mm and 200m, 
respectively. By targeting the cables of the medium-to-large 
suspension bridges, we have specified the goal range of cables 
with the diameter of the cable of 40~85mm, and its length of 
Development of Novel Multifunctional Robotic Crawler for 
Inspection of Hanger Cables in Suspension Bridges 
Kyeong Ho Cho, Young Hoon Jin, Ho Moon Kim, and Hyouk Ryeol Choi, Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2673
  
less than 200m. The human is hard to access to the cables in 
our goal ranges, and thus, the climbing robot can be an 
alternative for the human worker.  
 
Figure 1.  (a) The hanger cables of Young-Jong suspension bridge, Incheon, 
Republic of Korea (b) The structure of the hanger cable [13] 
If moving the robot from a cable to another cable takes 
long time, the total inspection time of a suspension bridge 
might be quite a long since a suspension bridge is composed 
of a lot of the cables. Therefore, the installation and removal 
process of the robot should be easy and simple. The hanger 
cable has the shape that are twisted strands with a core as the 
center as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The strand is made up with 
twisted wires. The twisted shape is like uniform terrains 
appearing periodically in the side of the robot. Namely, the 
robot should overcome the bumpy surface of the hanger cable. 
Since this issue was solved in previous work by using the 
caterpillar mechanism [11], [12], a caterpillar-based climbing 
robot is suitable for cable climbing. Furthermore, the diameter 
of the hanger cable is not actually identical in every section 
because the twisting of the hanger cable is able to be loosened. 
It means that the robot should be able to cope with a little 
change of the diameter. Above all, the robot should be able to 
transport the inspection device such as cameras and NDT 
because the ultimate goal of the robot is the inspection of the 
inside and outside of the hanger cable. 
Based on the conditions mentioned above, the 
requirements for a hanger cable inspection robot are 
summarized as shown in Table. 1. 
TABLE I.  REQUIREMENTS FOR HANGER CABLE INSPECTION ROBOT 
Applicable cable diameters 40 ~ 85mm 
Inspection distance ~ 200m 
Climbing speed ~ 0.08m/s 
Applicable payload ~ 24Kg 
Ability to cope with the diameter change ~ 10% of the diameter 
Capacity to ensure safety With safe-landing device 
Installation time ~ 10 min 
Driving type Caterpillar based 
III. MECHANISM DETAILS OF MRC
2
IN-II 
Considering the requirements of Table I, the 
multifunctional robotic crawler (MRC
2
IN-II) is newly 
designed as shown in Fig. 2. MRC
2
IN-II consists of an 
adhesion mechanism, two traction modules, and two sub 
modules. The traction and sub modules are faced each other, 
respectively. The specifications of MRC
2
IN-II are listed in 
Table II. 
 
Figure 2.  Multifunctional Robotic Crawler for Cable INspection - II 
(MRC
2
IN-II) 
TABLE II.  SPECIFICATIONS OF MRC
2
IN 
Dimension 328.5 x 507.5 x 701mm 
Mass 25Kg 
Applicable cable diameters 40 ~ 90mm 
Inspection distance 
39.6m  
under indoor environment 
Climbing speed 
0.08m/s without a payload 
0.05m/s with 24Kg 
Applicable payload 24Kg 
Ability to cope with  
the diameter change 
13% of the diameter 
Capacity to ensure safety Safe-landing mechanism 
Installation time 5 min 
Driving type Caterpillar based 
 
A. Adhesion Mechanism 
The adhesion mechanism generates adhesion force by 
using a screw-nut set and springs as illustrated in Fig. 3.  
 
Figure 3.  Operational principle of adhesion mechanism 
 
 
 
(a)                                           (b) 
2674
  
The installation process of the robot is as follow. 
? After placing the fixed traction module on the cable, 
assemble the detachable traction module, the nuts, 
and the adhesion mechanism with the fixed traction 
module along with the guides of the fixed traction 
module as displayed in Fig. 4. 
? Rotate the handle of the adhesion mechanism in order 
to generate the adhesion force by compressing the 
springs after bolting the adhesion mechanism with 
guides of the fixed traction module (Fig. 5 (Left)). 
? Tighten the nuts on the guides of the fixed traction 
module so as to fasten the detachable traction module. 
After then, disassemble the adhesion mechanism (Fig. 
5 (Right)). 
? Place the sub modules to the center of the hanger 
cable. Make the sub modules reach the hanger cable 
(Fig. 6). Fasten the clamps to keep the position of the 
sub modules. 
 
Figure 4.  Installation process of MRC
2
IN-II - 1 
The simple and easy installation is able to reduce the 
installation and removal time. In addition, the weight of the 
robot could be decreased since the adhesion mechanism is 
designed to be detached after generating the adhesion force.  
 
Figure 5.  Installation process of MRC
2
IN-II - 2 
 
Figure 6.  Installation process of MRC
2
IN-II - 3 
B. Traction Module 
The traction module of MRC2IN-II has a shape of a 
caterpillar equipped with an odometer. The driving 
mechanism and safe-landing mechanism exist inside the 
traction module as shown in Fig. 7. The spur and bevel gear 
sets deliver the driving torque of the BLDC motor to the 
pulley, and the pulley makes the driving force by rotating the 
specially designed timing belt which is thermo-welded with 
rubber. The belt contacts with Ultra High Molecular Weight 
Polyethylene sheet (UHMW PE sheet) which is commonly 
used for a treadmill.  
 
Figure 7.  Traction module of MRC
2
IN-II 
In the emergency situation such as the failure of power 
supply, the robot may be stuck on the cable or fall down by 
gravity. In order to ensure the safety of the robot and an 
operator, the robot needs to have a safe-landing mechanism 
automatically activated when the emergency situation 
happens.  
 
Figure 8.  Operational principle of the safe-landing mechanism 
The operational principle of the safe-landing mechanism 
is detailed as follows (Fig. 8). 
 
 
 
 
 
2675
  
? The timing belt is rotated by the robot weight, and the 
belt rotates the timing pulley. 
? The torque of the pulley is transferred to Shaft 2 
through the spur gear train. 
? Since the inverse brake holds Shaft 3 when the power 
is not supplied and Shaft 3 is fixed with the body of 
the disk damper, the body of the disk damper could 
not be rotated. 
? Shaft 2 rotates the inner part of the disk damper. The 
inner part is composed of silicon oil, and the applied 
torque is converted to the constant velocity depending 
on the viscosity of the silicon oil. 
? Consequently, the potential energy of the robot is 
dissipated by the damper, and the robot is able to land 
safely. 
On the other hand, the robot may be jammed at the stopped 
position by the very high-ratio gear train of BLDC motor 
combination when the power supply is lost. Thus, the driving 
mechanism has a clutch to prevent the jam. The clutch consists 
of the push typed solenoid, the spring, and the bar as shown in 
Fig. 9. The active bevel gear on the motor shaft is able to slide 
along the shaft of the motor. In case of supplying the power, 
the active bevel gear is combined with other bevel gears 
because the solenoids push the bar connected with the active 
bevel gear. Once the robot loses the power supply, the 
solenoids are returned to the original position, and the active 
bevel gear is released from the bevel gear train by the spring 
on the motor shaft. 
 
Figure 9.  Solenoid-Spring based Clutch 
C. Mechanism of Sub Module 
The sub module has two passive pulleys, the 
thermo-welded timing belt with rubber, and Ultra High 
Molecular Weigh Polyethylene sheet (UHMW PE sheet, same 
as the components of the traction module (Fig. 10)). The sub 
module is able to be moved in the up-down and left-right 
directions because it is connected with the vertical and 
horizontal guides. In other words, the robot is applicable to 
various diameters of the hanger cables by adjusting the 
position of the sub modules. The springs on guides are 
passively compressed when the sub modules meet an obstacle. 
The robot is able to overcome the obstacle through the instant 
displacement occurred by the compressed springs. In addition, 
the position of the sub module can be simply and easily fixed 
by tightening the lever of the clamps connected with the 
sliders. 
 
Figure 10.  Sub module of MRC
2
IN-II 
IV. EXPERIMENTS 
In order to verify the performance of MRC
2
IN, the indoor 
and outdoor experiments were conducted. The experimental 
environment for the indoor experiments was organized with a 
wire rope of diameter 76.2mm and length 2m. The capabilities 
on climbing and safe-landing were evaluated under indoor 
experiments. 
A. Climbing Capability 
The robot was able to climb with 0.08 m/s without a 
payload. For the long-distance climbing test, the robot 
repeated climbing up and down 33 times at 0.05m/s in a 0.6m 
section of the wire rope without a payload. The total climbing 
distance was 39.6m and the error was 0.3m as shown in Fig. 
11. 
 
Figure 11.  Long-distance climbing capability: (a) Initial position (b) Final 
position 
Even though the caterpillar is good at the rough terrain 
drive and the adhesion force is exceedingly big, there must be 
a lot of slippage because the wire rope is vertically installed 
and it has bumpy surface. Fig. 12 shows the positions of each 
traction module and an odometer. The amount of slippage 
between each traction module and the wire rope was about 
0.6m. The position of the odometer was exactly same with 
user command since the robot is controlled on the basis of an 
odometer. However, the odometer also slipped a little because 
real error was 0.3m.  
 
 
 
2676
  
 
Figure 12.  Position values of the long-distance climbing test 
To verify a payload of the robot, a mass of 12 Kg was 
loaded on each traction module (Total 24 Kg). The robot 
successfully climbed a wire rope at 0.05m/s as shown in Fig. 
13. 
 
Figure 13.  Verification of a payload of the robot 
An obstacle of the diameter 86mm (about 13% larger than 
the wire rope diameter, obstacle of height 4.953mm for each 
traction module) was attached on the wire rope so as to test the 
ability to overcome an obstacle. The robot smoothly climbed 
over an obstacle at 0.05m/s by using the instant compression 
of springs as shown in Fig. 14. 
B. Safe-landing Mechanism 
To check the normal operation of the safe-lading 
mechanism, the power supply was suspended when the robot 
reached to end of the wire rope. The loaded payload was 24Kg. 
After the power interruption, the bevel gear train was released 
and the inverse brake held the shaft fixed with the disk damper 
body. In other words, the safe-landing mechanism was 
automatically activated as soon as the robot lost the power 
supply. The robot safely climbed down with similar 
descending speed as shown in Fig. 15. 
 
Figure 14.  Test of ability to overcome an obstacle 
 
Figure 15.  Test of ability to overcome an obstacle 
C. Outdoor Experiment 
For the verification of the robot performance under outdoor 
condition, the robot climbed on the small-scaled real bridge 
(Diameter: 79mm, Length: about 3m, Na-rae Bridge, 
Republic of Korea). 
In this experiment, the robot was wirelessly controlled via 
Xbee
TM
 modules and the captured video data was also 
transmitted in real-time without a wire as shown in Fig. 16. 
Only electric power from portable gasoline power generator 
was supplied through the power cable. 
The robot successfully climbed at 0.05m/s without a 
payload and the safe-landing mechanism was operated 
normally. The cable could be inspected with captured video 
data in real-time as shown Fig. 17. 
 
 
 
 
2677
  
 
Figure 16.  Outdoor experiment setup 
 
Figure 17.  Outdoor experimental result 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
In this research, MRC
2
IN-II that is the second model of 
Multifunctional Robotic Crawler for Cable Inspection robot 
series was introduced. It is newly designed one by improving 
the stability on moving and payload. The working principles 
of the robot were explained in details, and its performances 
were verified under indoor and outdoor environmental 
experiments.  
As the future work, we are planning to combine MRC
2
IN-II 
with NDT device such as Magnetic Flux Leakage sensor. In 
addition, the robot system will experience field tests in real 
long span cable suspension bridges. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a part of a research project supported by Korea 
Ministry of Land, Transportation Maritime Affairs (MLTM) 
through Core Research Project4 of Super Long Span Bridge 
R&D Center (08 CTIP-E01).  
Also, this research was partially supported by the Industrial 
Strategic technology development program, project number: 
(10033888, development of Anthropomorphic Robot Hand 
Technology for Delicate Dynamic Grasp) funded By the 
Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MI, Korea). 
The authors wish to express their gratitude for the financial 
supports. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Tavakoli, L. Marques and A. de Almeida, “3DCLIMBER: Climbing 
and manipulation over 3D structures,” Journal of Mechatronics, vol. 21, 
no. 1, pp. 48–62, 2011. 
[2] J. –F. Allan, S. Lavoie, S. Reiher and G. Lambert, “Climbing and Pole 
Line Hardware Installation Robot for Construction of Distribution 
Lines,” International Conference on Applied Robotics for the Power 
Industry (CARPI), pp. 1-5, 2010. 
[3] Y. K. Song, C. M. Lee, I. M. Koo, D. T. Tran, H. Moon and H. R. Choi, 
“Development of Wall Climbing Robotic System for Inspection 
Purpose,” IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots 
and Systems (IROS), pp. 1990-1995, 2008 
[4] M. Tavakoli, C. Viegas, L. Marques, J. N. Pires and A. de Almeida, 
“OmniClimber-II: An omnidirectional climbing robot with high 
maneuverability and flexibility to adapt to non-flat surfaces,” IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 
1341-1346, 2013. 
[5] L. P. Kalra, J. Gu and M. Meng, “A Wall Climbing Robot for Oil Tank 
Inspection,” IEEE International Conference on Robotics and 
Biomimetics (ROBIO), pp. 1523- 1528, 2006. 
[6] A. Baghani, M. N. Ahmadabadi and A. Harati, “Kinematics Modeling 
of a Wheel-Based Pole Climbing Robot (UT-PCR),” IEEE 
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 
2099-2104, 2005. 
[7] F. Xu, X. Wang and L. Wang, “Cable Inspection Robot for 
Cable-Stayed Bridges: Design, Analysis, and Application,” Journal of 
Field Robotics, Vol. 23, No. 3, pp. 441-459, 2011. 
[8] H. M. Kim, K. H. Cho, F. Liu and H. R. Choi, “Development of Cable 
Climbing Robotic System for Inspection of Suspension Bridge,” 
International Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction 
(ISARC), pp. 1422-1423, 2011. 
[9] H. M. Kim, K. H. Cho, Y. H. Jin, F. Liu, J. C. Koo and H. R. Choi, 
“Development of Cable Climbing Robot for Maintenance of 
Suspension Bridges,” IEEE International Conference on Automation 
Science and Engineering (CASE), pp. 602-607, 2012. 
[10] K. H. Cho, H. M. Kim, Y. H. Jin, F. Liu, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, H. R. 
Choi, “Inspection Robot for Hanger Cable of Suspension Bridge: 
Mechanism Design and Analysis,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 1665–1674, 2013. 
[11] K. H. Cho, Y. H. Jin, H. M. Kim, H. Moon, J. C. Koo and H. R. Choi, 
“Caterpillar-based Cable Climbing Robot for Inspection of Suspension 
Bridge Hanger Rope,” IEEE International Conference on Automation 
Science and Engineering (CASE), pp.1071-1074, 2013. 
[12] K. H. Cho, Y. H. Jin, H. M. Kim, H. Moon, J. C. Koo, Y. J. Park, and H. 
R. Choi, “Development of Multifunctional Robotic Crawler for Cable 
INspection (MRC
2
IN),” IEEE International Conference on Ubiquitous 
Robots and Ambient Intelligence (URAI), pp.123-124, 2013. 
[13] (Feb. 13, 2014). [Online]. Available: 
http://www.latchandbatchelor.co.uk/rope-info/rope-components/ 
 
 
2678
