  
? 
Abstract—Bio-actuated, especially flagellated bacteria-driven, 
micro/nanorobots have been actively studied to develop novel 
technologies such as drug delivery systems (DDS), though the 
characteristics of the actuator (flagellar motor) have not been 
sufficiently investigated. For analysis or control of the bacterial 
flagellar motor, we previously proposed the local environmental 
control system with nano/micro dual pipettes to dynamically 
generate arbitrary local ion/reagent concentration change. In 
the result, transient-state and steady-state of local Na
+
 
concentration were manipulated with high facultativity. 
However, in this system, over time, the local ion/reagent could 
not be fully flushed out due to the increase of the diffusion rate 
caused by high external (in the bath) ion/reagent concentration. 
Therefore, in this paper, to achieve more arbitrary local 
environmental control, we propose the local environmental 
control system by combination of microfluidic chip with 
world-to-chip interface (WtCI) and pipette. We fabricate the 
WtCI microfluidic chip by two-step photolithography, and 
develop the system by using precisely controllable syringe pump. 
And, we demonstrate the basic feasibility of the local 
environmental control system by combination of WtCI 
microfluidic chip and pipette. 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Recently, flagellated bacteria have attracted much 
scientific attention as actuators [1-6] because of their useful 
features. First, the bacterial self-propagation makes mass 
production of actuators quite easy and low time-cost. Second, 
bacteria have the metabolic function, which enables to 
produce the proteins and to replace the impaired proteins with 
the new proteins by themselves, i.e. self-repairing. Third, the 
bacterial flagellar motors, which convert ion-motive force into 
mechanical force at high energy efficiency of up to near 100 %, 
excel in the energy efficiency. Fourth, bacterial well- 
characterized sensor systems (called “taxis systems”), which 
most of bacteria have in order to regulate the rotation of the 
flagellar motors in response to the environmental stimuli [7], 
are expected to be utilized to control the bacterial driving force 
artificially. Fifth, some genetically well-studied flagellated 
bacteria can be modified genetically to add or delete some 
functions depending on the requirements. 
 
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant-in-Aid for 
Young Scientists (B) 24760205). 
Kousuke Nogawa is with the Institute for Advanced Research, and the 
Department of Micro-Nano Systems Engineering, Nagoya University, 
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603 JAPAN (phone: +81-52-789-5026; 
fax: +81-52-789-5027; e-mail: nogawa@mech.nagoya-u.ac.jp). 
Fumihito Arai is with the Department of Micro-Nano Systems 
Engineering, Nagoya University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603 
JAPAN. 
 
In fact, flagellated bacteria have been used as actuators for 
various purposes in many fields, though they are still in the 
research phase. Kaehr et al. used flagellated bacteria in 
microfabricated devices for transportations of microobjects 
[2]. Kim et al. used flagellated bacteria as microfluidic pumps 
by flow deposition of bacteria onto the bottom surfaces in 
microfabricated fluid systems [3]. Flagellated bacteria were 
also used as driving forces for micro motors/gears utilizing the 
collision between bacteria and micro motors/gears [4-6]. 
And, especially, bacteria-driven microobjects have been 
actively studied toward micro/nanorobots to develop novel 
technologies such as drug delivery systems (DDS), 
micro/nano surgery inside the human body [8-12]. In these 
conventional researches, the bacteria-driven microobjects 
were fabricated by random or limited attachment of bacteria. 
To enhance the controllability of the bacteria-driven 
microobjects, we previously proposed the method to assemble 
single bacterium onto a microobject using optical tweezers [13, 
14]. From the quantitative analysis of behaviors of the 
Development of Local Environmental Control System               
by Combination of Microfluidic Chip and Pipette 
Kousuke Nogawa, Member, IEEE, and Fumihito Arai, Member, IEEE 
Top view
Birds-eye view
Pipette
Main channel
Outlet
World-to-chip interface
microchip
Pipette
Flow boundary
Measuring object
(e.g. bacterium)
Flow direction
 
Figure 1. Schematic of the concept of the local environmental control 
system by combination of WtCI microfluidic chip and pipette. 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 5842
  
 
Resist
Si wafer
UV light
Mask
Developer
Cured resist
Resist (2
nd
)
PDMS
Glass
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
Punched
holes
WtCI
Figure 3. Schematic of fabrication process of the WtCI microfluidic chip. (a) Spin coat silicon wafer with photo resist, (b) expose photo resist to UV light, 
(c) develop photo resist, (d) spin coat 2
nd
 photo resist layer, (e) expose 2
nd
 photo resist layer to UV light, (f) develop 2
nd
 photo resist layer, (g) mold PDMS, 
(h) detach, punch holes for tubing and cut PDMS to open WtCI, (i) bond PDMS to glass substrate. 
assembled bacterium-driven microobjects, it was shown that 
the mobility of the bacterium-driven microobjects was higher 
and their movements reflected the action of the intact single 
bacterium. 
While at the same time, the characteristics of the flagellar 
motor have not been sufficiently investigated. In fact, even the 
mechanism of the flagellar rotation has not been fully revealed. 
If detailed characteristics/mechanism of the flagellar rotation 
are revealed, intact bacterium-like action of the 
bacterium-driven microobjects can lead to more efficient and 
fine control utilizing bacterial natural features, such as 
chemotaxis. Therefore, for analysis or control of the bacterial 
flagellar motor, we previously proposed local environmental 
control system with nano/micro dual pipettes to dynamically 
generate arbitrary local ion/reagent concentration change [15, 
16]. However, in this system, over time, the local ion/reagent 
could not be fully flushed out due to the increase of the 
diffusion rate caused by high external (in the bath) ion/reagent 
concentration, because the solution in the chamber was not 
refreshed. 
Therefore, in this paper, we propose the local 
environmental control system by combination of microfluidic 
chip with world-to-chip interface (WtCI) and pipette (Fig. 1). 
We fabricate the WtCI microfluidic chip, develop a local 
environmental control system, and verify the feasibility of the 
proposed system experimentally. 
II. LOCAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL SYSTEM BY 
COMBINATION OF MICROFLUIDIC CHIP AND PIPETTE 
A. Concept 
By using microfluidic chip, discrete concentration control 
(switching between certain prepared solutions whose 
concentrations are different) can be done by manipulating the 
flow boundary. Concentration gradient also can be generated 
by well-designed mixing channels [17]. However, it is 
difficult to dynamically generate arbitrary local ion/reagent 
concentration change by microfluidic chip alone. 
Using local environmental control system with nano/micro 
dual pipettes we previously proposed [15, 16], transient-state 
and steady-state of local Na
+
 concentration were manipulated 
with high facultativity by switching between / ejecting 
simultaneously ion/reagent- containing and -free solutions 
with changing the spouting velocities independently. However, 
in this system, the solution in the chamber was not refreshed. 
Therefore, over time, the local ion/reagent could not be fully 
flushed out due to the increase of the diffusion rate caused by 
high external (in the bath) ion/reagent concentration. 
WtCI microfluidic chip was previously proposed by Arai 
et al. as a microfluidic device which concurrently can refresh 
 
2.5 mm
500 ?m
250 ?m
Inlet 1
Inlet 2
Outlet 1
Outlet 2
250 ?m
Main channel
World-to-chip
interface
Alignment mark
Alignment mark
250 ?m
250 ?m
10 mm
5mm
7 mm
7 mm
Layer 1
Layer 2
Two-step photolithography
Figure 2. Design and dimension of WtCI microfluidic chip. 
5843
  
(a)
(b)
(c)
Main channel
Stained water 
Non-stained
water 
Micropipette
Boundary
Flow direction
Boundary
(prev.)
Figure 6. Sequence images of the experiment of the flow boundary 
manipulation. (a) Initial state, (b) moved to the left, (c) moved to the 
right. Scale bars are 100 ?m. 
the solution, can control the flow boundary and can insert 
probe type devices from its “world-to-chip interface” [18]. 
Threfore, as shown in Fig. 1, the local ion/reagent 
concentration might be able to be controlled arbitrarily and 
dynamically by combining the manipulation of flow 
boundary (discrete (digital) control) and the mixing of 
ion/reagent-containing and -free solutions (to be exact, it 
might be caused by not mixing but interplay between flushing 
and diffusion) utilizing the ejection from the pipette 
(indiscrete (analog) control). 
B. Design and Fabrication of WtCI Microfluidic Chip 
 Figure 2 shows the design and the dimension of the WtCI 
microfluidic chip we made in this paper. This WtCI 
microfluidic chip had two inlets to generate a two-layer flow, 
main channel, two outlets just behind the main channel to 
drain the solutions, and WtCI to insert pipette into it. The 
heights of inlets, outlets and main channel were ~400 ?m. To 
make it less difficult to insert a micropipette into the chip, the 
height of WtCI was made taller than other parts by two-step 
photolithography. Other dimensions were determined based 
on desired flow rate, the height and width of the main channel 
and the performance of syringe pumps used in this paper. 
Figure 3 shows the schematic of the fabrication process of 
the WtCI microfluidic chip. At first, negative photo resist 
SU-8 3050 (Kayaku Microchem) was spin coated on a silicon 
wafer at 400 rpm for 60 sec (Fig. 3(a)), and baked using a hot 
plate at 95 ºC for 14 hours (thickness: ~400 ?m). Prebaked 
SU-8 was exposed to UV light using a photo mask with 
negative channel pattern shown in Fig. 2 (Fig. 3(b)), and 
baked using a hot plate at 65 ºC for 1 min & 95 ºC for 5 min. 
SU-8 was developed to make the channel pattern by 
dissolving the unexposed part (Fig. 3(c)). Developed SU-8 
was baked using a hot plate at 150 ºC for 2 hours for the 
purpose of hard bake. Then, SU-8 3050 was spin coated again 
on the silicon wafer with patterned first SU-8 layer at 300 rpm 
for 30 sec (Fig. 3(d)), and baked using a hot plate at 95 ºC for 
20 hours. Prebaked second SU-8 layer was exposed to UV 
light using a photo mask with negative  pattern of WtCI shown 
in Fig. 2 upper right (Fig. 3(e)), and baked using a hot plate at 
65 ºC for 1 min & 95 ºC for 5 min. Second SU-8 layer was 
developed (Fig. 3(f)), and baked using a hot plate at 150 ºC for 
2 hours for the purpose of hard bake. Next, polydimethyl- 
siloxane (PDMS; SILPOT 184, Dow Corning Toray) was 
Optical
microscope
WtCI micro-
fluidic chip
Micromanipulator
Syringe pump
Syringe pump
Micropipette
Air line to micropipette
Figure 5. Photo of the system configuration. 
1 cm
 
Figure 4. Photo of a fabricated WtCI microfluidic chip. 
5844
  
(a) (b)
(c)
(e)
(d)
(f)
Micropipette
Stained water Non-stained water
 
Figure 7. Experimental results of indiscrete control of local stain concentration by ejection of non-stained water from the micropipette. (a), (c) and (e) are 
the original images w/o ejection, with weak ejection and with strong ejection, respectively. (a), (c) and (e) were binarized and enhanced in contrast, and the 
results are (b), (d) and (f), respectively. The dotted lines in (d) and (f) indicate the half of the low concentration area. Scale bars are 50 ?m. 
poured onto the silicon wafer with patterned two SU-8 layers, 
and cured for ~1 day at room temperature (Fig. 3(g)). The 
cured PDMS was detached, punched holes at the end of inlets 
and outlets to connect tubes, and cut to open the WtCI (Fig. 
3(h)). Then, to seal the channels, the PDMS chip was bonded 
to a glass substrate by O
2
 plasma bonding technique (Fig. 3(i)). 
A fabricated WtCI microfluidic chip is shown in Fig. 4. 
C. System Configuration 
Figure 5 shows the system configuration of the local 
environmental control system by combination of WtCI 
microfluidic chip and glass micropipette. Inlet and syringe 
pump were connected by a connection tube which had a 
bifurcation to a waste line to decrease the flow volume into the 
chip. The flow rates of each inlet can be controlled 
independently, finely and dynamically by using precisely 
controllable syringe pumps. The WtCI microfluidic chip was 
set on the stage of an inverted optical microscope. The glass 
micropipette was fixed on a micromanipulator, and an air 
pressure controller was connected to the micropipette to eject 
a solution by air pressure. 
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
The capabilities of local environmental control system by 
combination of WtCI microfluidic chip and pipette, discrete 
control by the manipulation of flow boundary and indiscrete 
control by the mixing of the ion/reagent-containing and -free 
5845
  
 
0
50
100
150
200
250
0 50 100 150 200
Grey value
Position [pixel]
W/O ejection
Weak ejection
Strong ejection
Position: 0 Position: 229
Flow direction
Micropipette
Figure 8. Grey value (qualitative concentration of stain) plots along the 
flow direction. W/O ejection/weak ejection/strong ejection correspond to 
Fig. 7(b)/Fig. 7(d)/Fig. 7(f), respectively. The above image is the 
extraction from Fig. 7(b) as an illustration. 
solutions utilizing the ejection of the ion/reagent-free solution 
from the micropipette, were verified experimentally. 
In the following experiments, stained water and non- 
stained (pure) water were used to visualize the boundary and 
to measure the concentration qualitatively. And, the 
non-stained water was filled into the micropipette. 
A.  Discrete Control by Manipulation of Flow Boundary 
At first, discrete control of the local concentration was 
demonstrated by manipulation of the boundary between the 
stained water layer and non-stained water layer. Figure 6 
shows the experimental sequence images of the flow boundary 
manipulation. As shown in this figure, the boundary of the 
stained water layer and non-stained water layer was 
successfully manipulated by changing the flow rates of two 
syringe pumps. And, the boundary was almost straight. It 
means that the flow boundary was not largely affected by the 
insertion of the micropipette and two-layer flow was 
sustainably generated. 
From these results, it can be concluded that the ion/reagent 
concentration at a certain local target point in the main channel 
can be controlled discretely by flow boundary manipulation. 
Therefore, the capability of discrete control of local 
ion/reagent concentration by flow boundary manipulation was 
verified. 
B. Indiscrete Control by Mixing of Ion/Reagent-containing/ 
-free Solutions 
Next, indiscrete control of the local concentration was 
demonstrated. The non-stained water was ejected into the 
stained water layer to generate arbitrary concentration by the 
mixing of the stained and non-stained water. The ejection rate 
from the micropipette was changed in three levels (without 
ejection, with weak ejection and with strong ejection) by 
changing the applied air pressure to the micropipette. 
Qualitative evaluations of the stain concentrations were 
visually conducted. Original experimental images w/o 
ejection, with weak ejection and with strong ejection are 
shown in Fig. 7(a), (c) and (e), respectively. To make the 
difference clearer, these images were binarized. Subsequently, 
contrast was enhanced and brightness was adjusted. The 
results of this image processing for Fig. 7(a), (c) and (e) are 
shown in Fig. 7(b), (d) and (f), respectively. As shown in this 
figure, the areas where the stain concentrations were changed 
depended on the ejection rate of the non-stained water from 
the pipette. 
For more detailed evaluation, the grey values on the line 
along the flow direction, which is ~5 ?m away from the tip of 
the micropipette, were plotted in Fig. 8. The data for W/O 
ejection/weak ejection/strong ejection in Fig. 6 correspond to 
the images in Fig. 7(b)/Fig. 7(d)/Fig. 7(f), respectively. With 
ejection, grey values around the tip of the micropipette are 
bigger (brighter). As compared to each other condition, the 
grey values behind the micropipette were gradually changed 
depending on the ejection rate. In addition, with strong 
ejection, the grey values above the micropipette changed 
depending on the distance. 
From these results, it can be concluded that the ion/reagent 
concentration at a certain local target point in the main channel 
can be arbitrarily controlled depending on the ejection rate 
and the position relative to the micropipette. Therefore, the 
capability of indiscrete control of local ion/reagent 
concentration by mixing of ion/reagent-containing and -free 
solutions was verified. 
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, to achieve more arbitrary local 
environmental control, we proposed the local environmental 
control system by combination of world-to-chip interface 
(WtCI) microfluidic chip  and pipette. We fabricated the WtCI 
microfluidic chip using two-step photolithography, and 
develop the system by utilizing precisely controllable syringe 
pumps. And, we demonstrated the basic feasibility of the 
proposed local environmental control system, discrete control 
by the manipulation of flow boundary and indiscrete control 
by the mixing of the stained and non-stained water utilizing 
the ejection of the non-stained water from the micropipette. 
As the future work, we will evaluate the performance of 
the system, e.g. response times of flow boundary 
manipulation and the mixing, stability of the local ion/reagent 
concentration generated by mixing, etc. We will also identify 
the local ion/reagent concentration depending on the ejection 
rate and the position relative to the micropipette. And, finally, 
we will utilize our local environmental control system by 
combination of WtCI microfluidic chip and pipette for some 
practical biological application. 
5846
  
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Martel, M. Mohammadi, O. Felfoul, Z. Lu and P. Pouponneau, 
“Flagellated Magnetotactic Bacteria as Controlled MRI-trackable 
Propulsion and Steering Systems for Medical Nanorobots Operating in 
the Human Microvasculature,” The Intl. J. Robotics Research, Vol. 28, 
No. 4, pp. 571-582, 2009. 
[2] B. Kaehr and J. B. Shear, “High-Throughput Design of Microfluidics 
based on Directed Bacterial Motility,” Lab Chip, Vol. 9, pp. 2632–2637, 
2009. 
[3] M. J. Kim and K. S. Breuer, “Microfluidic Pump Powered by 
Self-Organizing Bacteria,” small, Vol. 4, No. 1, pp. 111-118, 2008. 
[4] L. Angelani, R. D. Leonardo and G. Ruocco, “Self-Starting 
Micromotors in a Bacterial Bath,” Phys. Rev. Lett., Vol. 102, 048104, 
2009. 
[5] R. D. Leonardo, L. Angelani, D. Dell'Arciprete, G. Ruocco, V. Iebba, S. 
Schippa, M. P. Conte, F. Mecarini, F. D. Angelis and E. D. Fabrizio, 
“Bacterial Ratchet Motors,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., Vol. 107, pp. 
9541-9545, 2010. 
[6] A. Sokolov, M. M. Apodaca, B. A. Grzybowski and I. S. Aranson, 
“Swimming Bacteria Power Microscopic Gears,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 
Vol. 107, pp. 969-974, 2010. 
[7] M. Homma, H. Oota, S. Kojima, I. Kawagishi and Y. Imae, 
“Chemotactic Responses to an Attractant and a Repellent by the Polar 
and Lateral Flagellar Systems of Vibrio Alginolyticus,” Microbiol., Vol. 
142, pp. 2777-2783, 1996. 
[8] E. B. Steager, M. S. Sakar, D. H. Kim, V. Kumar, G. J. Pappas and M. J. 
Kim, “Electrokinetic and Optical Control of Bacterial Microrobots,” J. 
Micromech. Microeng., Vol. 21, 035001(8pp), 2011. 
[9] N. Darnton, L. Turner, K. Breuer and H. C. Berg, “Moving Fluid with 
Bacterial Carpets,” Biophys. J., Vol. 86, pp. 1863-1870, 2004. 
[10] B. Behkam and M. Sitti, “Effect of Quantity and Configuration of 
Attached Bacteria on Bacterial Propulsion of Microbeads,” Appl. Phys. 
Lett., Vol. 93, 223901, 2008. 
[11] B. Behkam and M. Sitti, “Bacterial Flagella-based Propulsion and 
On/Off Motion Control of Microscale Objects,” Appl. Phys. Lett., Vol. 
90, 023902, 2007. 
[12] D. B. Weibel, P. Garstecki, D. Ryan, W. R. DiLuzio, M. Mayer, J. E. 
Seto and G. M. Whitesides, “Microoxen: Microorganisms to Move 
Microscale Loads,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., Vol. 102, pp. 11963-11967, 
2005. 
[13] K. Nogawa, M. Kojima, M. Nakajima, M. Homma and T. Fukuda, 
“Individual Single Bacterium Attachment on Microobject using Optical 
Tweezers for Bacteria-driven Microrobots,” Proc. of 2010 Intl. Symp. 
on Micro-Nano Mechatronics and Human Sci., pp. 99-102, 2010. 
[14] K. Nogawa, M. Kojima, M. Nakajima, M. Homma, F. Arai and T. 
Fukuda, “Improvement of Motility of Bacterium-driven Microobject 
Fabricated by Optical Tweezers,” Proc. of 2011 Intl. Symp. on 
Micro-Nano Mechatronics and Human Science, pp. 482-485, 2011. 
[15] K. Nogawa, M. Kojima, M. Nakajima, S. Kojima, M. Homma and T. 
Fukuda, “Rotational Speed Control of Na
+
-Driven Flagellar Motor by 
Dual Pipettes,” IEEE Trans. on NanoBiosci., Vol. 8, No. 4, pp.341-348, 
2009. 
[16] K. Nogawa, M. Kojima, M. Nakajima, M. Homma and T. Fukuda, 
“Driving Force Control of Flagellar Motor by Local Environmental 
Control System with Nano/Micro Dual Pipettes,” J. Robotics Society of 
Japan, Vol. 29, No. 5, pp. 463-469, 2011 (in Japanese). 
[17] S. K. W. Dertinger, D. T. Chiu, N. L. Jeon, and G. M. Whitesides, 
"Generation of Gradients Having Complex Shapes Using Microfluidic 
Networks," Anal. Chem., Vol. 73, pp. 1240-1246, 2001. 
[18] T. Kato, N. Inomata, S. Sakuma, Y. Yamanishi, H. Maruyama and F. 
Arai, “Multiscale Environmental Measurement by Biochip with 
World-to-chip Interface,” Proc. RSJ2008, 2M1-04, 2008 (in Japanese). 
 
5847
