Dynamic Releasing of Biological Cells at High Speed Using Parallel
Mechanism to Control Adhesion Forces
Ebubekir Avci, Hiroyuki Yabugaki, Takayuki Hattori, Kazuto Kamiyama, Masaru Kojima, Yasushi Mae,
and Tatsuo Arai
Abstract— In this paper, a dynamic releasing method for
high-speed biological cell manipulation is proposed. A compact
parallel mechanism, used for grasping and releasing microob-
jects, was utilized for generating controllable vibration to
overcome the strong adhesion forces between the end effector
and the manipulated object. To reach the required acceleration
of the end effector, which is necessary for the detachment of
the target object, vibration in the end effector is generated by
applying sinusoidal voltage to the PZT actuator of the parallel
mechanism. For the necessary acceleration, we focus on the
frequency of the vibration, while keeping the amplitude of
the PZT actuator vibration small (14 nm) to achieve precise
positioning. Releasing of microbeads and biological cells is
conducted and results are compared for the ﬁrst time. The
effect of the air and liquid environments are also investigated.
Successful releasing (97.5%) of biological cells proves that the
proposed active releasing method is an appropriate solution for
the adhered biological cells during the releasing task.
I. INTRODUCTION
The extension of robotic pick-and-place techniques from
macro to microscale is a complex task. The manipulation
at microscopic scale adds convenience, but brings on new
challenges. One of the strong points of the micromanipula-
tion is the ease in handling a microobject (particularly when
the size is smaller than 50 m), even with one end effector,
due to adhesion forces [1].
On the other hand, depth of view, inverse proportionality
of resolution and ﬁeld of view for optical microscope, limited
space for end effectors, miniaturization of the entire robotic
structure could be accepted as difﬁculties of micro-scale
manipulation. However, among the challenges, a particularly
difﬁcult issue is the stickiness between the microobject and
the end effector during the releasing task, resulting from the
dominance of the surface forces [2]. Scaling down the forces
from macro to micro leads surface forces (adhesion forces)
consisting of the van der Waals, capillary and electrostatic
forces, to dominate volumetric forces, e.g., gravity [3].
Adhesion forces being attractive, the handled microobjects
tend to stick to the end effector, making releasing very hard
if not impossible. It does not matter whether the system uses
This work was supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc Research on Inno-
vative Areas ”Bio Assembler” (23106005) from the Ministry of Education,
Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan.
E. Avci is with the Department of Systems Innovation, Osaka
University, 1-3, Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531,
Japan as well as the Department of Electronics and Information
Engineering, Toyota Technological Institute, Nagoya, Japan.
avci@arai-lab.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp
H. Yabugaki, T. Hattori, K. Kamiyama, M. Kojima, Y . Mae, and T. Arai
are with the Department of Systems Innovation, Osaka University, 1-3,
Machikaneyama, Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, Japan.
one [4], two [5] or multiple end effectors [6] to achieve
micromanipulation, adhesion forces stand as a challenge to
be overcome for the releasing task.
In our recent work, a new compact parallel mechanism to
decrease the undesired vibration of end effectors during high-
speed motions was proposed [7]. We also introduced the ma-
nipulation of microobjects at high speed using a two-ﬁngered
microhand to achieve a 3D cellular structure [8]. Although
grasping and transportation microbeads (40-60 m) actions
were conducted with a high success rate, the results of the
releasing task were not satisfactory (70%). The success rate
of the release would be lower in case of manipulating smaller
size objects, as the effect of adhesion forces is inversely
proportional to the size of the microobjects. In our current
work, to achieve a complete pick-and-place task with a high
success rate, a fast and robust technique to detach the target
object from the end effector is studied.
For the detachment of microobjects from the end effector,
various methods, which can be categorized as passive and
active release, have been proposed. Passive release depends
on changing the features of the end effector, substrate or
environment. Coating the substrate with gold [9], coating
the end effector chemically [10], surface roughening of
microgrippers [11], controlling the pH value of the liquid
environment [12] are a few examples of passive release.
However, this method mostly depends on surface properties.
In addition, changing the features of the manipulation tools
and environment would not be appropriate for biological cell
handling in terms of bio-compatibility.
On the other hand, applying a voltage between the end
effector and the substrate to produce an electric ﬁeld [13],
using a vacuum tool to create a pressure difference for
picking up and releasing [14] are two different cases of active
release. Among the various techniques of active release, the
detachment of the target object from the end effector utilizing
the motion of the end effector has drawn much attention due
to its high success rate [2], [15], [16].
Chen et al. [2] achieved the release of 7.5-10.9 m size
borosilicate glass spheres in air by integrating a plunging
mechanism to the gripper to impact the microobject so that
it gains sufﬁcient momentum to overcome adhesion forces.
The success rate of the releasing task was 100%. Haliyo et
al. [15] accomplished releasing 40 m radius glass spheres
in air by taking advantage of the inertial effects of both
the end-effector and the manipulated object to overbalance
adhesion forces. The high acceleration required for the
release is produced by PZT ceramics. Recently, 20-100 m
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3789
Forceext Adhesion Force
End Effector
Microobject
Fig. 3: Adhesion forces between the microobject and the end
effector.
(Dell, XPS600, Pentium 4 3.80 GHz) through commercially
available stage controllers (Sigma-Koki: Omec-4BG, Fine-
503). The parallel link mechanism is controlled by the
same PC through a D/A board (Contec DA16-16(LPCI)L)
and a drive ampliﬁer (MATSUSADA, HJPZ-0.15Px3). The
displacements are measured with a strain gauge attached to
the piezoelectric devices, and sent to the PC through a strain
ampliﬁer (Kyowa MCD-16A) and an A/D board (Contec
AD16-16(PCI)EV) for PID control, in order to compensate
the hysteresis effect of the piezo actuator.
The two end effectors of the microhand and the target
object are observed under an IX81 motorized inverted optical
microscope using an Olympus LUCPlanFLN 20x/0.45na
Ph1 objective lens. The images are captured by a high-
speed camera (Photron FASTCAM MC2) and displayed on a
Windows PC (Intel Core i7 CPU, 2.93GHz with 4 GB RAM)
monitor. The piezo actuator, attached to the objective lens,
controls the motion of the objective lens to keep the target in
focus. The end effectors, –the right and left ﬁngers– of this
micromanipulator consist of two glass needles which have a
23 mm length, 1 mm diameter and sharpened ends with less
than 1 m curvature.
B. Effect of Adhesion Forces on Micromanipulation
The dynamics of microscopic objects are different from
macroscale objects. As length(l) of objects decrease from
macro to microscale, surface forces (l
2
) begin to dominate
body forces (l
3
). Because gravitational forces are propor-
tional to the object volume whereas adhesion forces are pro-
portional to the object surface, adhesion becomes dominant
compared to gravitational force in the microscale [3]. The
adhesion forces include van der Waals forces, electrostatic
forces, and surface tension forces.
As gravity can be neglected in this scale, only the adhesion
force (W ) needs to be overcome by the acceleration(a) of
the end effector [17].
F
ext
=ma> 2R
b
W: (1)
In (1), F
ext
stands for the force required to detach the
end effector from the microobject. R
b
represents the radius
of the microobject. The effect of the adhesion force to the
end effector and the manipulated object can be seen in Fig.
3.
a)             b)
Fig. 4: Release attempt of 55 m microsphere with two
ﬁngered microhand without any special method, a) before
release attempt, b) after release attempt.
PZT actuator
Strain gauge
Micro
manipulator
Amplifier
Computer
ADC
DAC
Oscillator
circuit
Amplifier
?
+
Adder
circuit
PID 
control
program
Fig. 5: Control of parallel mechanism for grasping, releasing
and active vibration.
In Fig. 4, release attempt for the 55 m microsphere
with two ﬁngered microhand without any special method is
shown. As it can be seen, after opening the end effectors,
microbeads was adhered to the right ﬁnger. As the effect of
adhesion forces is inversely proportional to the size of the
microobjects, releasing of smaller size microobjects is more
difﬁcult in the absence of a particular method.
C. Controllable Vibration for the Active Release
To release the manipulated object attached to the end
effector, a controllable vibration in the ﬁnger is produced by
the PZT actuator of the parallel link mechanism. If the end
effector can reach the required acceleration, overcoming the
adhesion forces (detachment) is possible due to the inertial
effects of both the end effector and the manipulated object.
Fig. 5 illustrates the control scheme of the parallel link
mechanism, i.e., the right end effector. To move the end
effector to the desired position, a necessary voltage is applied
from the computer via a Digital-to-Analog Card (DAC)
and an ampliﬁer (Piezo Driver). Through strain gauge, the
extension of each PZT actuator is sent to the same computer
via another ampliﬁer and an Analog-to-Digital Card (ADC).
With this feedback mechanism, PID control is applied, in
3791
order to achieve a robust positioning.
On the other hand, the same parallel link mechanism is
used to generate vibration through the PZT actuators of
the parallel mechanism. For this, a custom-made oscillator
circuit is integrated to control the scheme as seen in Fig. 5.
The On-Off switch of the oscillator circuit is controlled by
the computer. The type of signal sent by oscillator circuit is
sinusoidal.
From the peak acceleration formula [16], if the frequency
(f) and amplitude (A) are known, the required acceleration
(a) can be calculated.
a = 4
2
f
2
A: (2)
In [16], the optimum amplitude was investigated by ﬁxing
the frequency. However, in our study, to release the manip-
ulated object with a small deﬂection of the end effector, we
set the amplitude to a small but sufﬁcient to release value
[15]. To calculate the amplitude of the end effector vibration,
the following steps are conducted.
E
c
= (E
m
V
c
)=V
m
: (3)
In (3),E
m
represents the maximum extension of the PZT
actuator –10.7 m– in the case of applying the maximum
voltage (V
m
) of 150 V . E
c
stands for current extension,
while V
c
stands for current voltage, i.e., 200 mV . Thus the
current extension of the PZT actuator is 14 nm.
To calculate the current amplitude of the vibration, the
following equation is utilized.
D
c
= (D
m
E
c
)=E
m
: (4)
In (4), D
c
represents the current deﬂection of the end
effector from the original position, whereD
m
stands for the
maximum deﬂection (141.6 m) of the end effector, which
can be obtained from the workspace of the parallel mech-
anism. Consequently, the current deﬂection is calculated as
0.18 m. However, from the image feedback, the deﬂection
amount is calculated as 1 m. Being close to the resonance
frequency of the end effector could be a possible reason,
which will be considered in the future work.
As the amplitude of the vibration is obtained, the optimum
frequency for successful releasing can be investigated. Thus,
we can calculate the required minimum acceleration for the
releasing task in the next chapter.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Experiments with the various size microbeads (10 m,
20 m, 55 m, 97 m) and 3T3 mouse cell (13 m) have
been conducted. For the 10 m - 20 m microbeads and
13 m cell, 40x magniﬁcation is used which makes visible
space as 128 m x 128 m. On the other hand, for the 55
m and 97 m microbeads, 10x objective lens is used and
that provides visual space of 512 m x 512 m. Releasing
experiments have been done just above (height was 1-2m)
the substrate to not be affected by air ﬂow and ﬂuid ﬂow.
Room temperature was set to 24

C.
0
10
20
30
40
50
0 500 1000 1500
cultured medium/10 um microbead
cultured medium/13 um cell
frequency (Hz)
position change (um)
Fig. 6: Effect of frequency to the release of microobjects.
Current work is a part of study about high-speed micro-
manipulation [8]. As in the previous work [8], high-speed
grasping and transportation of various size microobjects was
achieved, on this paper, we focus on the fast releasing
strategy. Thus releasing part of the micromanipulation task
is discussed here.
In the following experiments, optimum frequency for
various size microbeads and 3T3 mouse cells have been
investigated. Releasing in different environments such as air,
water and culture medium has been conducted to understand
the effect of the environment to the required amount of
frequency and success rate of the task. At the end of
experiments, it was possible to compare active release results
for the microbeads and the biological cell.
A. Active Releasing at High Speed
First, different amount of frequencies were applied to the
adhered microbeads and mouse cells to understand the effect
of the changes in frequency and thus in acceleration.
In Fig. 6, two different objects (10 m size microbead
and 13 m size mouse cell) releasing in culture medium
is illustrated. When the frequency of the PZT actuator was
increased from 0 Hz to 500 Hz, manipulated objects were
still adhered to the end effector. Then the frequency was
increased from 0 Hz to 1 kHz and the microbead was
detached with 12 m positional change, where 3T3 cell is
detached with 3.5 m positional change. Finally, when the
frequency is increased from 0 Hz to 1.5 kHz, this time, the
microbead was released with 20 m positional change and
the cell was released with 40 m positional change.
From the Fig. 6, signiﬁcance of an appropriate amount
of frequency can be realized. When the applied frequency
is less than the necessary amount, releasing is not possible.
When the applied amount is more than the required value,
the positional change of the microbeads and biological cell
is enormous due to the inertia of both the end effector and
manipulated object. Therefore, necessary frequency for suc-
cessful release is investigated for different size microbeads
and 3T3 mouse cell.
3792
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
4000
4500
0 20406080 100 120
water?microbeads
air?microbeads
cultured medium?
microbeads
cultured medium cells
frequency [Hz]
diameter [?m]
Fig. 7: relationship of required frequency and size of the
manipulated objects in different environments.
For measuring the required frequency in different sit-
uations, four different size microbeads were released by
generating vibration at the end effector in air, water and
culture medium. For the mouse cell case, release task was
conducted in culture medium as that is the only appropriate
environment for biological cells.
In Fig. 7, in general, when the size of the microbeads is
bigger, the required frequency for release is smaller. There-
fore, size of the adhered object and the required frequency
to release are inversely proportional. Another outcome of
the experiment was necessity of the bigger frequency for
releasing the microbeads in air compare to pure water and
culture medium environments. Latter two environments are
required similar frequencies.
For releasing the 3T3 mouse cell, the necessary frequency
was about 2-3 kHz. It is not possible to apply exactly
same amount of frequency to release biological cells for
different trials as can be seen in Fig. 7. A possible reason for
this uncertainty is as follows. During the grasping task, the
contact area between the end effector and microbeads is not
changing every time as microbeads have hard structure. On
the other hand, as cells are very soft, during the grasping task,
it is easy to squeeze the cell. According to squeezing amount,
contact area between the end effector and manipulated cell is
altering. Thus the amount of the adhesion force is changing
too. Consequently, it is not feasible to apply a ﬁxed amount
of frequency to achieve high success rate of biological cell
releasing. Adding a force sensor, which was manufactured
and experimented in our previous work [18], would be
helpful to measure adhesion force, thus to estimate the
required amount of frequency.
In Table II, the required frequencies to release multi-sized
microbeads and the mouse cell are shown. By using (2),
the required accelerations according to found frequencies
are calculated as seen in Table II. Required duration for the
successful release is realized as 10 ms. If vibration applied
for 10 ms, releasing the manipulated objects was always
achieved. After ﬁnding the necessary frequency for each
TABLE II: required acceleration for successful release in
different environments.
Microbeads
diameter(?m)
9.6 20 55 97
Air/
microbeads
Release
frequency[Hz]
4000 3600 2200 3100
Release acceleration 
value(m/s
2
)
631 511.1 190.9 379
Water/
microbeads
Release
frequency[Hz]
3400 750 750 3100
Release acceleration 
value (m/s
2
)
455.9 22.2 22.2 379
Cultured
medium/
microbeads
Release
frequency[Hz]
3100 750 750 750
Release acceleration 
value(m/s
2
)
379 22.2 22.2 22.2
Cultured
medium/
cells
Release
frequency[Hz]
2000?3100
Release acceleration 
value(m/s
2
)
157.8?379
case, success rate of the strategy was 97.5 % out of 360
trial.
Dynamic releasing of a mouse cell is shown in Fig. 8. The
successful release of the cell has been achieved consecutively
two times by applying the vibration to the end effector. After
opening the end effectors, the adhered cell to the right end
effector is shown In Fig. 8 a). In Fig. 8 b), the released cell
just after applying the vibration is illustrated. In Fig. 8 c),
the right end effector is moving away to show release was
successful. Then the right end effector is coming closer to
the cell again and touch it. Thus the cell is adhered to the
right ﬁnger again. In Fig. 8 d), the end effector is moving to
the right direction with adhered cell to show stickiness. In
Fig. 8 e), vibration is applied again and cell is released for
the second time. In Fig. 8 f), the right end effector is moving
away from the released mouse cell.
B. Discussion
By generating vibration in the end effector with the PZT
actuator and adjusting the vibration frequency with respect
to the size of the object, kind of the object and environ-
ment, successful release is conﬁrmed through experiments.
Applying vibration to release biological cell was done for the
ﬁrst time. And to produce vibration, no additional actuation
mechanism was needed unlike the related works as the
actuators to move the end effector have ability to produce
vibration.
During the experiments, effect of the environment was
investigated. When the end effector touches to the target
object, probability of sticking depends on the environment
( in culture medium >in air >in water). However, after
sticking, the required frequency in each environment is in
different order (in air >in water >in culture medium).
For precise placing, adhesion force information is impor-
tant as it is not same all the time. Therefore, adding a force
sensor to the system is our next work.
3793
a)             b)
c)             d)
e)             f)
Fig. 8: dynamic releasing of 13 m 3T3 mouse cell.
In current study, availability of the vibration as a release
method is conﬁrmed for multi-sized microbeads and biolog-
ical cells. However as manipulated object would stick either
of the end effectors, controlling both ﬁngers with the parallel
mechanism is feasible solution. In addition, controlling both
end effectors with PZT actuators offers new abilities to
the microhand for more complex manipulation tasks, e.g.,
rotation or turnover of the target objects.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
To release the microobjects, an active release method –
controllable vibration– is proposed. No additional actuation
mechanism is needed as the mechanism to control the
end effector position includes 3 PZT actuators which can
produce high frequency vibration. By ﬁxing the amplitude
of the vibration, the required frequencies under different
conditions are investigated. Thus, the needed accelerations
are calculated according to frequency results.
Releasing of the microbeads and the biological cells (ﬁrst
time) is conducted. The required frequencies for releasing
in air, water and culture medium are analyzed. Compari-
son shows that the required frequency decreases with the
increasing size of microbeads. In addition, for the similar
size microbead and mouse cell, similar level of frequency is
necessary. However for ﬁnding optimum frequency to release
the cell, a force sensor can be integrated to the end effector
to calculate exactly necessary frequency for each time.
After reaching the certain amount of frequency, 97.5%
success rate for releasing is achieved. The accuracy of the
placing will be studied in the next work.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Takeuchi, M. Nakajima, M. Kojima, T. Fukuda, Evaluation and
application of Thermoresponsive Gel handling towards manipulation
of single cells, in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., San
Francisco, USA, Sept. 2011, pp.457-462.
[2] B.K. Chen, Y . Zhang, Y . Sun, Active Release of Microobjects Using
a MEMS Microgripper to Overcome Adhesion Forces, Journal of
Microelectromechanical Systems, vol. 18, no. 3, pp.652-659, 2009.
[3] R.S. Fearing, Survey of sticking effects for micro-parts, in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Pittsburgh, USA, 1995, pp.
212-217.
[4] K. Takahashi, H. Kajihara, M. Urago, S. Saito, Y . Mochimaru, and T.
Onzawa, V oltage required to detach an adhered particle by Coulomb
interaction for micromanipulation, J. Appl. Phys. vol. 90, no. 1, pp.
432-437, 2001.
[5] O. Sardan, V . Eichhorn, D. H. Petersen, S. Fatikow, O. Sigmund and P.
Boggild, Rapid prototyping of nanotube-based devices using topology-
optimized microgrippers, Nanotechnology, vol. 19, no. 49, pp. 495-
503, 2008.
[6] T. G. Leong, C. L. Randall, B. R. Benson, N. Bassik, G. M. Stern, and
D. H. Gracias, Tetherless thermobiochemically actuated microgrippers,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, USA, vol. 106, no.
3, pp. 703-708, 2009.
[7] T. Ejima, K. Ohara, M. Kojima, Y . Mae, T. Tanikawa, and T. Arai,
Development of Microhand which Utilizes Singularity of Parallel
Mechanism, for Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Tokyo,
Japan, Nov. 2013, pp. 1525-1530.
[8] E. Avci, C. N. Nguyen, K. Ohara, M. Kojima, Y . Mae, and T. Arai,
Towards High Speed Automated Micromanipulation, in Proc. IEEE
Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Karlsruhe, Germany, 2013, pp. 1710-1715.
[9] H. T. Miyazaki, Y . Tomizawa, S. Saito, T. Sato, and N. Shinya, Adhe-
sion of micrometer-sized polymer particles under a scanning electron
microscope, Journal of Applied Physics , vol.88, no.6, pp.3330-3340,
2000.
[10] K. Kim, X. Liu, Y . Zhang, and Y . Sun, Nanonewton force-controlled
manipulation of biological cells using a monolithic MEMS micro-
gripper with two-axis force feedback, Journal of Micromechanics and
Microengineering, vol. 18, no.5, pp.055013, 2008.
[11] F. Arai, D. Ando, T. Fukuda, Y . Nonoda, T. Oota, Micro manipulation
based on micro physics-strategy based on attractive force reduction
and stress measurement, in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot.
Syst., vol.2, Pittsburgh, USA, 1995, pp.236-241.
[12] J. Dejeu, M. Gauthier, P. Rougeot, and W. Boireau, Adhesion
Forces Controlled by Chemical Self-Assembly and pH: Application
to Robotic Microhandling, ACS Applied Materials&Interfaces, vol. 1,
no. 9, pp. 1966-1973, 2009.
[13] S. Saito, H. Himeno, and K. Takahashi, Electrostatic detachment of
an adhering particle from a micromanipulated probe, J. Appl. Phys.
vol. 93, no. 4, pp. 2219-2224, 2003.
[14] W. Zesch, M. Brunner, A. Weber, Vacuum tool for handling microob-
jects with a NanoRobot, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.,
Albuquerque, USA, 1997, pp.1761-1766.
[15] D. S. Haliyo, Y . Rollot, and S. Regnier, Manipulation of micro-objects
using adhesion forces and dynamical effects, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf.
Robot. Autom., Washington, USA, 2002, pp. 1949-1954.
[16] T. Chen, L. Chen, L. Sun, W. Rong, and Q. Yang, Micro manipu-
lation based on adhesion control with compound vibration, in Proc.
IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Robot. Syst., Taipei, 2010, pp. 6137-6142.
[17] Y . Rollot, S. Regnier, and J.-C. Guinot, Simulation of micro-
manipulations: Adhesion forces and speciﬁc dynamic models, Inter-
national Journal of Adhesion and Adhesives, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 35-48,
1999.
[18] H. Yabugaki, K. Ohara, M. Kojima, Y . Mae, T. Tanikawa, T. Arai,
Automated Stable Grasping with Two-Fingered Microhand using Mi-
cro Force Sensor, in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., Karlsruhe,
Germany, 2013, pp. 2756-2761.
3794
