  
? 
Abstract— This paper describes the bipedal humanoid robot 
that makes human laugh with its whole body expression and 
affect human's psychological state. In order to realize "Social 
interaction" between human and robot, the robot has to affect 
human's psychological state actively. We focused on "laugh" 
because it can be thought as a typical example for researching 
"Social interaction". Looking through a Japanese comedy style 
called "manzai" or the art of conversation, we picked out 
several methods for making human laugh. Then we made 
several skits with the advice of comedians, and made the whole 
body humanoid robot perform them. Results of experimental 
evaluation with these skits shows that the robot's behavior made 
subjects laugh and change their psychological state seen as a 
decrease of "Depression" and "Anger". 
I. INTRODUCTION 
n an  aging society, there is a growing need for  a robot that 
can perform not only the alternative way of labor but also 
support human's daily life including medical treatment(?) 
and nursing. These robots should communicate with humans 
naturally in order to support them both physically and 
psychologically. 
 When a human communicates with another fluently, there 
is an interaction called "Social interaction" in psychology or 
social science. That means humans communicate with each 
other assuming the other's psychological state include 
emotion or mood watching their behavior and change his or 
her behavior thinking about how the other will react to it or 
how it will change the other's psychological state[1]. In this 
way, humans assume each other's psychological state and 
change it actively. If this kind of interaction was to be realized 
between a robot and a human, the robot could support human 
life more naturally  assuming human's sadness mood and 
behaving in order to change it to a positive mood. 
 
This study was conducted with the support of the Research Institute for 
Science and Engineering, Waseda University and as part of the humanoid 
project at the Humanoid Robotics Institute, Waseda University. It was also 
supported in part by the MEXT/JSPS KAKENHI Grant No. 25220005; 
Global COE Program "Global Robot Academia", MEXT, Japan;) Grants for 
Excellent Graduate Schools, MEXT, Japan; we thank all of them for the 
financial and technical support provided. 
T. Kishi is with the Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Waseda 
University, #41-304, 17 Kikui-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 162-0044, JAPAN 
(e-mail: contact@takanishi.mech.waseda.ac.jp) and also a research fellow at 
the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. 
N. Endo is with the Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University. 
T. Nozawa is with the Faculty of Human Studies, Mejiro University. 
T. Otani, S. Cosentino and M. Zecca are with the Graduate School of 
Science and Engineering, Waseda University. 
K. Hashimoto is with the Research Institute for Science and Engineering, 
Waseda University. 
A. Takanishi is with the Department of Modern Mechanical Engineering, 
Waseda University; and one of the core members of the Humanoid Robotics 
Institute (HRI), Waseda University. 
 Focusing on the robot's side, in order to realize the "Social 
interaction" with humans, robots should have four functions 
presented below(Fig. 1). 
? Assume human's psychological state from their behavior 
? Change robot's psychological state according to external 
stimuli 
? Express robot's psychological state 
? Affect human's psychological state 
 There are many researches about robots that aim to realize 
the communication with human. For example, Okao-vision 
can assume human's psychological state from their facial 
expression[2]. Leonard[3] or WE-4RII[4] have virtual 
psychological states and can react to the external stimuli. 
Geminoid[5] or HRP-4C[6] have human-like appearance for 
expressing human-like messages. But there are less 
approaches that aim to affect human's psychological state 
with active behavior of robot. Paro[7] was developed in order 
to commit human's mental state, but it can only react to the 
human's affection in passive ways.  
 We have also been developing a whole body humanoid 
robot that can interact with humans. In 2007, we have 
developed KOBIAN-R[8,9] that can react to the external 
stimuli with its virtual model of psychological state and 
express its psychological state with its whole body and 
moving around. 
 This research is focused on making humans laugh in order  
to affect human's psychological state actively. In this paper, 
especially we describe the way we tried to make humans 
laugh and the method and results of the experiment in order 
to examine if the robot can change human's psychological 
state with its behavior. First, we searched for the methods to 
make humans laugh from a method of comedy, "manzai" or 
the art of conversation. Then we made KOBIAN to perform 
the skits with its whole body based on these methods to make 
humans laugh thanks to the advice of comedians. The result 
 
Bipedal humanoid robot that makes humans laugh with use of the 
method of comedy and affects their psychological state actively 
T. Kishi, N. Endo, T. Nozawa, T. Otani, S. Cosentino, M. Zecca, K. Hashimoto and A. Takanishi, 
Member, IEEE 
I
Fig. 1. Social Interaction between a human and a robot. 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 1965
  
of the evaluation showed that our robot could make humans 
laugh and it affected their psychological state.  
 In this paper, Chapter II shows the way to define the 
behavior of the robot in order to make humans laugh. The 
content of the skits with the robot's performance is shown in 
Chapter III. The method and results of experimental 
evaluation are described in Chapter IV. Finally, the paper 
concludes and the future works are described in Chapter V. 
II. HOW TO MAKE HUMAN LAUGH WITH ROBOT'S WHOLE BODY 
EXPRESSION 
A. Interaction through laughter 
 Many ways could be thought for the robot to change 
human's psychological state during interaction, but in this 
research we choose making humans laugh. That's because 
firstly laugh is an involuntary movement and can be detected 
by physiological measurements. For example, we achieved to 
detect subject's laugh from the movement of diaphragm  using 
an EMG sensor and an acceleration sensor [10]. That means 
that reactions to the robot's affect can be easily detected. 
Secondly, previous research shows that when a human laughs, 
his or her mood changes to positive. That means if a robot can 
make a human laugh, it might affect its psychological state. 
Third, we can see "infectious laugh" during the interaction 
between humans. Infectious laugh is said to be caused 
because when one person sees another laugh, he or she 
assumes the other person's positive mood and his mood is 
brought to positive and laughs. So we can say that Infectious 
laugh is a typical example for social interaction. Supported by 
these reasons, we focused on laughter as a good example of 
research of interaction between a human and a robot. 
 From now on, there are some examples of robots that make 
humans laugh. For example, comedy is realized by comic duo 
between two Robovie[11], Papero and Zen-jiro[12], and ii-1 
and ii-2[13]. The purpose of these researches are not to 
achieve interaction between humans and a robot but to make 
human laugh itself. So the interaction is closed between the 
performers. These researches also didn't conduct any 
experiment in order to examine how these robots' behavior 
affect humans' psychological state. 
 In addition, human comedians perform comedy with 
moving their whole body fast and wide and changing facial 
expressions for making human laugh effectively. However 
the robots used in the previous researchs are all wheeled small 
robots. Therefore, almost all of their skits consisted of funny 
talks and did not include motions of their body. 
 Considering these aspects, we decided the purpose of this 
research to be to achieve a biped humanoid robot that can 
affect humans' psychological state actively through making 
them laugh with its whole body expression. 
B.  Research about laugh 
 In psychology and social science, there are many 
researches about the mechanism how humans recognize the 
humor. Theory by Suls[14] suggests that the humor is 
recognized from the gap between predictions and reality. In 
addition, the mechanism how the gap produces the laugh is 
shown in the Spencer and Floit theory by Y. Kimura[15]. This 
theory says that when a human is highly stressed and 
suddenly the stress is released, he or she laughs. 
 Many ways of performances for making humans laugh as 
comic story, comedy, gag, joke, comic drama have been 
created. All of these are based on the strategy to create the gap 
between predictions and reality. In order to achieve skits for 
robots to make humans laugh, the creation of the gap is also 
thought to be important. So we studied the way these 
performances produce this kind of gap. 
C. Methods for making humans laugh 
 Part of the methods for making humans laugh are published 
by comedians or researchers. In order to achieve a robot's 
behavior for making humans laugh based on these methods, 
we studied 6 books[16-21] in which the methods for comedy, 
"manzai" and the ways for funny conversations are gathered 
comprehensively. These methods in the books are picked up 
from wide range of skits or ways of expressions, but most of 
the methods are commonly the same between other contents. 
We extracted the methods that are especially common in 
these books and show them below. 
 
1) Funny behavior 
? Overblown: Exaggerate too much 
? Equivoque: Homonym or parody 
? Blue jokes: Make a dirty joke 
? Sympathetic story: Saying the empathic small things that 
almost everyone has experienced once  
? Induced laugh: Comedian laughs aimed to the audiences' 
infectious laugh 
 
2) Funny context 
? Running gag: Use the same story again and again 
? Unexpected: Do completely unexpected behavior 
 
3) Funny character 
? Self-flattery, Self-deprecating humor 
? Imitation  
 
D. Making skits  
 Based on these methods, we made the skits performed by 
KOBIAN with its whole body expression. In making the 
details of the patter or motion, we discussed with comedians. 
Until now,  most of the researched robots performed funny 
skits by the style like "manzai" duo. In this case, interaction is 
closed between the performer. However, concerning about 
future extensions for interaction between humans, we 
selected the skits that can be performed by one robot. We 
made 12 skits and the length of them were from 20 second to 
three minutes. These skits are achieved by the combination of 
the methods we showed before. In order to make a wide range 
of humans laugh, we made the skits with as many methods as 
possible (Table 1). 
III. SKITS PERFORMED BY KOBIAN 
 The typical example of skits are described below. The 
methods used in each skit are shown in < >. The motion and 
patter during those skits are shown in Tables 2 to 7. 
1966
  
A. Opening greeting (Table 2) 
 KOBIAN bows deeply and says "Hello, I'm KOBIAN". It 
strikes a pose rubbing its hand and says "I'm KOBIAN 
because I always flatter humans". In Japanese, "flatter" is 
pronounced as "KOBI-ru", so this is an <equivoque> 
sentence. Then it says "Hi! boss, let's go drinking" and 
KOBIAN <unexpectedly> invite human to drinking although 
it is a robot. Next it says "I can't drink alcohol because I am a 
robot" using its identity with  <sympathetic story> method. 
Finally it orders  oil as the normal robot saying "Excuse me, 
please give me a cup of oil" as the <self-deprecating> 
method. 
B. No surprise exercise (Table 3) 
 This skit is performed by the <imitation> of Japanese 
famous comedian named COWCOW. This skit is consisted of 
the parody of the a content where a young man dances to the 
music for teaching exercises for children in a TV show. Such 
kind of TV show is very popular in Japan. The funninest of 
this comedy is that some natural things are explained as if 
they were an unusual thing in an <overblown> way. 
 In the beginning of this skit, KOBIAN puts his hand on its 
waist and tilts forward a bit saying "Hi everyone, it's time for 
"No surprise exercise!". Let's start!". After that the music 
starts and KOBIAN begins a bending and stretching exercise 
to the words "No surprise! No surprise! No surprise 
exercise!"  
Then KOBIAN starts walking to the words "Move your right 
leg forward, then your left leg forward, then..." and when the 
words continuing "You can walk!", KOBIAN turn to the front 
and strikes a pose with a smile. The words "No surprise! No 
surprise! No surprise exercise!" stream again. This is the 
<running gag> method.  
 In the same way, KOBIAN performs to the words that says 
only natural things "When you play "Rock, paper, scissors" 
and you decide which one to show after seeing the others' 
hands, you can win!", "If you strike other's knee from back, 
the knee bends!" and "A, I, U, E, O, KA, KI, KU, KEKO! 
(Japanese alphabet)" striking a pose with a facial expression 
again and again. The sound of this skit is supplied from the 
original skit by COWCOW. 
 
C.  Imitation of Kein Kosugi (Table 4) 
 This skit is an <imitation> of an American actor famous in 
Japan who's way of speaking is characteristic. This actor is 
famous for his well-muscled body, this skit uses this 
characteristic.  
 In the beginning, KOBIAN says "The next skit is the 
imitation of Kein Kosugi who's Japanese is not fluent but his 
Engish is fluent." It is one of the commonly used way where 
the comedian explains its story beforehand. It aims to make 
the audience assume the robot's behavior in order to clarify 
the gap of the skit. After that KOBIAN point to its body parts 
saying "Ah...Fukkin (abdominal muscle)", 
"Ah...Kyoukin(breast muscle)" and 
"Ah...Jyouwankin(brachial muscle)" with not fluent Japanese. 
This is an <overblown> <imitation> of the way of speaking of 
Kein Kosugi. Then KOBIAN continues in the same way of 
saying "Subete kita-e-re-ba, ki-mi-mo... (If you train them all, 
You also will have the...)". Then KOBIAN says with perfect 
English "Perfect body!". The <unexpected> changing of the 
tone and way of saying produces the gap and that makes 
funniness. Finally KOBIAN says "Isn't it good? The voice is 
just like as the original!". Robot can record and play every 
voice, so it is the use of <sympathetic story> method. The 
voice in this skit is the voice of the Japanese comedian 
Takahiro Yamamoto. 
D. Imitation of Masuo-san (Table  5) 
 "Masuo-san" is a very famous character of a Japanese 
cartoon named "Sazae-san". First KOBIAN explains the skit 
saying "Next skit is the imitation of a surprised Masuo-san 
from the cartoon "Sazae-san"". It aims that audience's 
expectation of story produces the gap clearly. Then it makes 
<overblown> <imitation> of body pose and facial expression 
saying "Ee!" in <unexpectedly> loud voice. The tone of the 
voice and posture produces the gap. Then it repeats the pose 
and voice "Ee!" "Ee!" "Ee!" as the <running gag> method. 
The voice of "Ee!" is the voice in comedy by CANxCAN. 
E. KOBIAN laughs (Table 6) 
 KOBIAN laughs a lot which aims <infectious laugh> of the 
communication partner. 
Table.1 Use of method of comedy 
Title 
Behavior Context Character 
Overblown Equivoque 
Blue 
jokes
Sympathetic
story 
Infectious
laugh 
Running
gag 
Unexpected 
Self 
deprecating 
Self-
flattery
Imitation
Opening greeting   ?       ? ?    
Imitation of Masuo-san ?        ? ?    ? 
No surprise exercise      ?   ?      ? 
Imitation of Kein Kosugi ?        ? ?    ? 
Funny face      ?    ? ? ?   
KOBIAN laughs        ?         
Scared robot ?         ?      
Shoulder discomfort of robot      ?      ?    
Robot dance   ?         ?    
Spew venom          ? ?   ?   
Transform       ?    ? ?    
Ending greeting     ? ?    ?       
1967
  
Table2 Opening greeting 
Time [s] 2 6 9 19 
Robot's 
behavior 
 
Line Hi! Hello! My name is KOBIAN because I always flatter humans Let's go drinking! 
 
Table3 No surprise exercise 
Time [s] 2 15 23 29 
Robot's 
behavior 
  
Line It's time for "No surprise exercise"! 
No surprise...No surprise...No 
surprise exercise! 
Move your right leg forward, then 
your left forward to... 
You can walk! 
 
Table 4 Imitation of Kein Kosugi 
Time [s] 10 15 19 22 
Robot's 
behavior 
 
Line 
Eh... Fukkin! 
(Eh...abdominal muscle!) 
Subete kita-e-re-ba, 
(If you train them all) 
Ki-mi-mo...  
(You also will have the...) 
Perfect body! 
 
                                                         Table5 Imitation of Masuo-san                                                                     Table6 KOBIAN laughs 
Time [s] 2 6  Time [s] 1 
 Robot's 
behavior 
 
Robot's
behavior
Line 
Next skit is imitation of surprised 
Masuo-san from cartoon "Sazae-san"
Eh! Line Ha ha ha ha ha... 
  
Table7  Ending greeting 
Time [s] 3 14 17 23 
Robot's 
behavior 
 
Line Oops! It's time to go. 
It's not a case to say such a thing. 
I have no time! 
Thank you. KOBIAN speaks. KOMANECHI! 
1968
  
F. Ending greeting (Table 7) 
 First KOBIAN says "Oops! It's time to go". "I should go to 
the part-time work in the convenience store as I am a robot." 
Robots doing a part-time work is thought to be quite usual, so 
it is use of <Sympathetic story> method. KOBIAN feed its 
own lines saying "I have no time to say such a thing. I have no 
time!" and KOBIAN strikes a pose to hit someone just as 
"manzai" performers do. Finally KOBIAN greets saying 
"Thank you. KOBIAN speaks." and <Unexpectedly> strikes 
a pose of KOMANECHI (exaggerate expression of high-cut 
swimsuit) with use of <Blue jokes> method saying 
"KOMANECHI!" 
IV. EXPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 
 We conducted an experiment in order to evaluate if the 
skits by the robot can make humans laugh, and can affect 
humans' psychological state. We recorded the stories in video 
and showed them to 21 subjects (19 men and 2 women) who 
joined the experiment and whose average age was 23.2. As 
the previous research about laugh shows if there is more than 
one subject in the experimental space, infectious laugh 
occurrs between the subjects[22]. This phenomenon prevents 
us to examine the reason why the subjects laugh. So we 
conducted the experiment one by one subjects in a closed 
space. All the skits were recorded on  separated videos. The 
order of the skits we showed them s were as below. First, 
"Opening greeting" was shown. Finally "Ending greeting" 
was shown. Between them, all the other videos were shown in 
random order. In order to achieve the effect of "Infectious 
laugh," the skit "KOBIAN laughs" was inserted between 
every other videos. The full length of the experiment was 
about 10 minutes. 
 We evaluated the stories in three ways. First, we recorded 
the subjects' reaction with a video camera and analyzed it. 
Second, in order to evaluate if the robot's story could affect 
subjects' psychological state, we conducted a questionnaire to 
check their mood with the method called POMS(Profile of 
Mood States) [23] before and after showing the video and 
compared the differences. Finally, we evaluated the 
subjective funniness of each story with a board on which 
subjects attached the plate of the stories depending on the 
funniness they felt(Fig. 3). The results are shown below. 
A. Reaction analysis 
 In order to analyze the subjects' reaction, we categorized 
the reaction as below. If the subjects burst into laugh, we 
categorized it as "Laugh" and if the subjects change their 
facial expression from "Neutral" to "Smile" and didn't burst 
into laugh, we categorized it as "Smile." Fig.4 shows an 
example.  The result is shown in Fig. 5. This result shows that 
especially "Imitation of Masuo-san", "No surprise exercise" 
and "Opening greetings" made more than half subjects laugh.  
B. Result of POMS and change of subject's psychological 
state 
 The result of comparison of the POMS results between,  
before and after showing videos is shown in Fig. 6. 
"Depression" and "Anger" were significantly decreased. This 
is thought to be because the subjects' laugh changed their 
mood to positive as psychologists' suggest. This results shows 
that the robot achieved to affect human's psychological state 
with its behavior. 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Subjects' reaction 
          (a) Neutral                          (b)Smile                          (c)Laugh 
Fig. 4. Example of Subject’s response. 
Fig. 3. Subjective evaluation of funniness with the board
Not Funny Funny
Imitation 
of Masuo
Next skit is the imitation 
of a surprised Masuo-
san
Ee!
Transform
Transform!
No…I found I don’t 
have such a function
Imitation of 
Kein Kosugi
Fukkin, Kyoukin, 
Jyouwankin…
If you train them all, you 
will have perfect body!
Robot dance
This is the real robot 
dance
KOBIAN 
laughs
Ha hahahaha…..
Opening
Greeting
Hell my name is 
KOBIAN
Because I always flatter 
humans
 
 
Fig. 2. Experimental setup 
PC
Projection
Video camera for recording
subjects’ reaction
Projector
Subject
Experimenter
1969
  
C. Evaluation of subjective funniness  
 We calculated the subjective funniness based on where on 
the board the subjects attached every plate that described the 
stories. We calculated the subjective funniness of every 
stories  defining the left side of the board is 0 points and the 
right side is 100 points. Fig. 7 shows the results. Comparison 
of this result and results about subjects' laugh shows that in 
most  stories, the tendency of the order of number of the 
subjects whom the story made laugh and value of subjective 
funniness was the same. 
 However, though "Imitation of Kein Kosugi" made four 
times more subjects laught than "Spew venom," its subjective 
funniness was lower. That means a different cause from 
funniness made subjects laugh. One of the causes could be the 
difference of the impression caused by robot's whole body 
expression including facial expression. In "Imitation of Kein 
Kosugi", the movement of body parts and facial expression 
are very wide. On the other hand, "Spew venom" was the skit 
in which KOBIAN only tells the funny story, the movement 
of body parts and facial expression were small and impression 
was less dynamic. This result has a possibility to suggest that 
in order to make humans laugh with robot's motion, dynamic 
expression with body and facial expression is effective. 
 In addition, though "KOBIAN laughs" made many subjects 
laugh, the value of subjective funniness of this skit was low. 
That might suggest that subjects didn't laugh because of the 
funniness of the story but because of the effect of infectious 
laugh. That might show the effectiveness of the robot to laugh 
itself in order to make human laugh by infectious laugh effect. 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
 In order to achieve an interaction between humans and 
robots that includes the robot's active affection to the human's 
 
 
psychological state, we conducted an experiment of making 
humans laugh with robot's behavior. We achieved robot's 
skits with robot's whole body expression based on the 
combination of methods of making human laugh. The result 
by video of robot's comedy shows that the robot realized to 
make human laugh. The results also suggested that when a 
robot makes human laugh, its whole body expression 
including its facial expression might be effective. It is also 
suggested that when robot laughs, infectious laugh could 
occur between robot and human. Through making human 
laugh, robot's behavior affect humans' psychological state 
seen in the slight decrease of "Depression" and "Anger". 
 In the future, we are planning to make more skits and 
conduct an experiment with more subjects in order to 
examine the relationship between reaction and combination 
of methods of comedy. In addition, we are planning to 
examine the effect of embodiment of the robot to the reaction 
of the subjects, and to feedback the humans' laugh reaction to 
the robot to achieve the interaction between a robot and a 
human through laughing. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Nakajima et.al: “Psychological dictionary”?Yuuikaku?1999. 
[2] "OKAO Vision" http://www.omron.co.jp/ecb/products/mobile/ 
[3] A. Thomaz et. al: “An Embodied Computational Model of Social 
Referencing”, Robot and Human Interactive Communication, 2005 
[4] K. Itoh, et al., “Mechanical Design of Emotion Expression Humanoid 
Robot WE-4RII” Proc. of 16th CISM-IFToMM Symposium on Robot 
Design, Dynamics and Control, pp. 255-262, 2006. 
[5] H. Ishiguro et. al: “Building artificial humans to understand humans”, 
Journal of Artifical Organs. Vol. 10(3), pp. 133-142, 2007. 
[6] K. Kaneko et. al: “Cybernetic Human HRP-4C”, Proc. of  the 9th 
IEEE-RAS International Conference on Humanoid Robots, pp. 7-14, 
2009. 
[7] A. Burton: " Dolphins, dogs, and robot seals for the treatment of 
neurological disease" , The Lancet Neurology, Vol. 12, Issue 9, pp. 851 
- 852,  2013. 
[8] N. Endo et al.: "Development of Whole-body Emotional Expression 
Humanoid Robot for ADL-assistive RT services," Journal of Robotics 
and Mechatronics, Vol. 23, No. 6, pp. 969-977, 2011. 
[9] T. Kishi et. al: "Development of Expressive Robotic Head for Bipedal 
Humanoid Robot," Proc. of the 2012 IEEE/RSJ International 
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 4584-4589, 2012. 
[10] S. Cosentino et. al: "Human-humanoid robot social interaction: 
Laughter", Proc. of the 2013 IEEE International Conference on 
Robotics and Biomimetics, 2013. 
[11] K. Hayashi et. al: "Manzai robot"?Journal of RSJ, Vol. 25, No. 3, pp. 
381-389 , 2007? 
[12] "Manzai duo by Zenjiro and Papero" 
 http://robot.watch.impress.co.jp/docs/news/20091022_323741.html. 
[13] "Manzai duo by ii-1 and ii-2 in Konan universiy" 
 http://www.robonable.jp/news/2012/01/konan-0117.html. 
[14] J. M. Suls: "A two-stage model for the appreciation of jokes and 
cartoons: an information-processing analysis", Goldstein and 
McGhee,chapter 5,pp. 81-100, 1972. 
[15] Y. Kimura: "Laugh as a science"?Shin-yo-sha?2010? 
[16] H. Iyama: "Equation of laugh", Kagaku-dojin, 2007. 
[17] I. tanaka: "Manners that member of society should know", Litto music, 
2012. 
[18] A. Nakamura: "Sence of laugh", Iwanami, 2002. 
[19] Broadcaster seminor by Asai-kikaku: "Pro teaches the skill of laugh", 
Kodansha, 2006. 
[20] K. Mizuno: "Skill to make people laugh", OS publisher, 2003. 
[21] Ganso bakusho king: "How to do Manzai ",Litto music, 2008. 
[22] Y. Tatsumoto et. al: "The positive laugh increase with the other's 
presence?", book of Kansai Fukushi University, 2006. 
[23] McNair et. al: "Profile of Mood States (POMS)", 1989.
Fig. 7 Subjective evaluation of funniness
Fig. 6. Result of POMS that shows the affection of subjects' 
psychological state 
*:p<0.05
* *
??
??
???
????
??
??
?? ?? ??
T?
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
??? ???
Stress
Anxiety
Depression
Dejection
Anger
Hostility
Activity Fatigue Confused
Before After
T – Value (POMS score)
1970
