Design and Evolution of a Modular Tensegrity Robot Platform
Jonathan Bruce
1
, Ken Caluwaerts
2
, Atil Iscen
3
, Andrew P. Sabelhaus
4
, and Vytas SunSpiral
5
Abstract— NASA Ames Research Center is developing a
compliant modular tensegrity robotic platform for planetary
exploration. In this paper we present the design and evolution
of the platform’s main hardware component, an untethered,
robust tensegrity strut, with rich sensor feedback and ca-
ble actuation. Each strut is a complete robot, and multiple
struts can be combined together to form a wide range of
complex tensegrity robots. Our current goal for the tensegrity
robotic platform is the development of SUPERball, a 6-strut
icosahedron underactuated tensegrity robot aimed at dynamic
locomotion for planetary exploration rovers and landers, but
the aim is for the modular strut to enable a wide range of
tensegrity morphologies.
SUPERball is a second generation prototype, evolving from
the tensegrity robot ReCTeR, which is also a modular,
lightweight, highly compliant 6-strut tensegrity robot that was
used to validate our physics based NASA Tensegrity Robot
Toolkit (NTRT) simulator. Many hardware design parameters
of the SUPERball were driven by locomotion results obtained in
our validated simulator. These evolutionary explorations helped
constrain motor torque and speed parameters, along with strut
and string stress. As construction of the hardware has ﬁnalized,
we have also used the same evolutionary framework to evolve
controllers that respect the built hardware parameters.
I. INTRODUCTION
As part of our research for the NASA Innovative Advanced
Concepts (NIAC) program, we are developing the SUPER-
ball (Spherical Underactuated Planetary Exploration Robot),
which is a compliant icosahedron tensegrity robot designed
for planetary landing and exploration. Tensegrity robots
are soft machines which are uniquely able to compliantly
absorb forces and interact with unstructured environments.
However, instead of engineering a single new robot, we have
chosen to develop a fundamentally reusable component for
tensegrity robots by creating a modular robotic tensegrity
strut which contains an integrated system of power, sensing,
actuation, and communications. The purpose is to enable the
exploration of the wide range of possible tensegrity robotic
morphologies by simply combining the robotic struts into
new systems.
1
Jonathan Bruce is with the Autonomous Systems Lab, University of
California Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA jbruce@soe.ucsc.edu
2
Ken Caluwaerts is with the Electronics and Information
Systems Department, Ghent University, B-9000, Belgium
ken.caluwaerts@ugent.be
3
Atil Iscen is with Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA
iscena@onid.orst.edu
4
Andrew P. Sabelhaus is with the Berkeley Institute of Design, University
of California Berkeley, USA apsabelhaus@berkeley.edu
5
Vytas SunSpiral is with SGT Inc., Greenbelt, MD 20770, USA and with
the NASA Ames Intelligent Robotics Group, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
vytas.sunspiral@nasa.gov
Fig. 1. The tensegrity prototypes studied in this paper. Left: ReCTeR, a
lightweight (1:1kg), untethered tensegrity icosahedron with six DC motors
and rich sensor integration. Right: current version of the strut design for our
modular tensegrity platform. The end caps each house a powerful brushless
motor and batteries, while the central aluminum tube contains compression
springs and sensors to which external cables can be attached.
A. Tensegrity Structures
It is possible to design free-standing structures by arrang-
ing axially loaded compression elements in a well crafted
network of tensional elements. Such an arrangement is called
a tensegrity structure (tensile integrity). Each element of the
structure experiences either pure axial compression or pure
tension [1][2]. The absence of bending or shear forces allows
for highly efﬁcient use of materials, resulting in lightweight,
yet robust systems.
Because the struts are not directly connected, tensegrities
have the unique property that externally applied forces dis-
tribute through the structure via multiple load paths. This
creates a soft structure, for a soft robot, out of inherently
rigid materials. Since there are no rigid connections within
the structure, there are also no lever arms to magnify forces.
The result is a global level of robustness and tolerance to
forces applied from any direction.
This makes tensegrity robots inherently compliant and
extremely well suited for physical interactions with complex
and poorly modeled natural environments. Active motion
in tensegrity robots can be performed by changing cable
lengths in parallel, enabling the use of many small actuators
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 3483
that work together, rather than individual heavy actuators
which work in series. There are also many indications
that tensegrity properties are prevalent throughout biological
systems, and the morphology of the SUPERball that we
are studying, especially when carrying a payload, ends up
bearing a striking resemblance to the nucleated tensegrity
model of cell structure [3][4].
B. Prior Work in Tensegrity Robotics Design
Because of the limited research into actuated tensegrity
robotics, many design aspects have yet to be carefully
studied. To date, the majority of constructed tensegrity robots
have been simple prototypes using servo motors, limited
sensing, and are often tethered for power and control [5].
Others have had fewer limbs than the SUPER ball, or have
been secured to the ground as opposed to free-standing
[6][7]. Some related approaches utilize tensegrity as part of a
larger, more complicated system, but not as the primary loco-
motion method [8]. Others have created designs that do not
use direct cable actuation, as in the SUPER ball, but instead
have more limited forms of locomotion through vibration
[9][10]. Finally, the most similar designs to the SUPER ball
have not been engineered to speciﬁc design requirements nor
have the advanced sensing framework needed for controls
testing [11].
C. Tensegrity Robotics for Space Exploration
The high strength-to-weight ratio of tensegrity structures
is very attractive due to the impact of mass on mission launch
costs. Large tensegrity structures have been shown to be
deployable from small compact conﬁgurations which enable
them to ﬁt into space constrained launch fairings. While the
above qualities have inspired studies of deployable antennae
and other large space structures [12], it is in the realm
of planetary exploration that we see the most signiﬁcant
role for many of the unique force distribution qualities of
tensegrity robots. A recent NIAC project [13] speciﬁcally
studies landing and surface mobility of tensegrities, ex-
ploiting the controllable compliance and force distribution
properties which make for reliable and robust environmental
interactions.
The main goal is to develop tensegrity probes with
an actively controllable tensile network to enable compact
stowage for launch, followed by deployment in preparation
for landing. Due to their natural compliance and structural
force distribution properties, tensegrity probes can safely
absorb signiﬁcant impact forces, enabling high speed Entry,
Descent, and Landing (EDL) scenarios where the probe itself
acts much like an airbag. However, unlike an airbag which
must be discarded after a single use, the tensegrity probe
can actively control its shape to provide compliant rolling
mobility while still maintaining the ability to safely absorb
impact shocks that might occur during exploration. This
combination of functions from a single structure enables
compact and lightweight planetary exploration missions with
the capabilities of traditional wheeled rovers, but with a mass
and cost similar or less than a stationary probe.
Therefore, a large fraction of the overall weight (as mea-
sured at atmospheric entry) of a tensegrity mission can be
used for the scientiﬁc payload due to the dual use of the
structure as a lander and a rover. This allows for cheaper
missions and enable new forms of surface exploration that
utilize the natural tolerance to impacts of tensegrities [14].
D. Tensegrity Control
Buckminster Fuller [1] and the artist Kenneth Snelson [2]
initially explored tensegrity structures in the 1960s. Until
the mid-1990s the majority of tensegrity related research
was concerned with form-ﬁnding [15] and design analysis
of static structure [16][17]. More recently, active control
efforts for tensegrities began to emerge [18], as well as
descriptions of the dynamics of tensegrity structures taking
the connectivity pattern into account [17].
The tensegrity principle allows for compliance and multi-
path load distribution, which is ideal for physical interaction
with the environment. However, these aspects also present
signiﬁcant challenges to traditional control approaches. A
recent review [19] shows that there are still many open
problems in actively controlling tensegrities, especially when
interacting with an environment during locomotion or ma-
nipulation tasks. Though work has been done to control a
tensegrity to change into a speciﬁed shape [20], practical
determination of the desired shape itself is an ongoing
challenge. Recently, locomotion of icosahedral tensegrity
robots through body deformation was demonstrated [21].
Other work has addressed collision between rigid tensegrity
elements during control generation [22][23].
The approach taken by the NASA Dynamic Tensegrity
Robotics Lab builds on this by developing body defor-
mation control algorithms based on central pattern gen-
erators [24][25], distributed learning, reservoir computing,
and genetic algorithms [26], instead of traditional linear
and nonlinear systems approaches. To date, our approach
has shown promising results at productively harnessing the
potential of complex, compliant, and nonlinear tensegrity
structures.
E. A Modular Tensegrity Platform
Though there is much prior work in a variety of theoretical
areas for tensegrities, engineering knowledge of constructing
practical tensegrity robots is limited. Since a staggering
variety of different tensegrity structures can be constructed
from collections of simple sticks and strings (for example,
see the TensegriToy modeling kit), we have made it a priority
to develop self-contained robotic tensegrity struts which can
be used to explore and build a wide range of tensegrity
robots simply by combining them into novel structures.
Our designs are driven by experimental results obtained
from a previous prototype, ReCTeR (Reservoir Compliant
Tensegrity Robot) in combination with simulation results of
our validated tensegrity simulator NTRT (NASA Tensegrity
Robotics Toolkit) [27][28].
3484
F . Outline
This paper is organized as follows. We ﬁrst present the
detailed design of ReCTeR, a lightweight tensegrity proto-
type, in Section II. Section III discusses what we learned
from experiments with ReCTeR and our tensegrity simulator
and how this information deﬁned the design goals for our
modular tensegrity platform. Next, Section IV presents the
design and construction of a modular tensegrity strut for
use in SUPERball and related tensegrity conﬁgurations.
The following Section V shows the performance of learned
steerable control policies in our accurate tensegrity simulator.
We end this paper with our conclusions and a future work
outlook in Section VI.
II. RECTER
The common tensegrity icosahedron is advantageous for
rolling locomotion, due to its symmetric spherical shape. Its
relatively low number of compressive elements (6 struts),
makes it rather practical to build [5]. Furthermore, tensegrity
icosahedra can be folded into a ﬂat star shape, which is
interesting for future space exploration because of reduced
mission payload costs [14].
ReCTeR (Reservoir Compliant Tensegrity Robot) was built
to study compliant locomotion with tensegrity structures and
to validate our simulation results [27][28]. The robot is
a lightweight, underactuated tensegrity prototype with rich
sensor integration, based on off-the-shelf components (Fig.
2). In the following paragraphs, we detail the mechanical and
sensor design of ReCTeR.
Fig. 2. ReCTeR compliant tensegrity robot. Top left: deployed open spindle
end cap design with protective motor sleeve removed. Top right: close up
end cap design without the protective silicone cap, showing the four force
transducers per end. Center left: deployed robot with 3 active struts (6 4.5W
DC motors). Center right: active folding. Bottom: ReCTeR rolling (from
right to left).
A. Mechanical Design
The 24 shell tensile elements of ReCTeR are passive,
the robot can move, fold and change shape by six actu-
ated springs running through the assembly. ReCTeR has a
total mass of 1:1kg (batteries included), which is achieved
by using carbon ﬁber struts (8mm outer diameter). The
tensegrity principle allows to make effective use of the axial
strength of the carbon ﬁber. Over the course of several
months, we have performed drop tests up to 0:5m and
various experiments without any of the struts splicing or
breaking, clearly demonstrating how tensegrity structures use
structural elements in pure compression or tension [28].
Three of ReCTeR’s struts are actuated (two actuators
each), while the other three are fully passive and sensorless
(see Fig. 3). The total mass of the struts is 0:05kg and
0:270kg for the passive and active struts respectively.
The six actuated springs are selected such that each end
cap has exactly one actuated spring attached to it. By further
requiring the pattern to be symmetric and preventing parallel
struts from being connected, we found exactly one pattern
(up to a mirror symmetry). It can be seen that this connection
pattern allows for large shape deformations, as the actuated
springs have a large workspace compared shell actuation.
Fig. 3 also shows a different representation of the con-
nection pattern. More precisely, it connects the centers of
each equilateral triangle in the tensegrity icosahedron
1
with
its adjacent equilateral triangular faces. It can easily be seen
that the centers of the equilateral triangles form a cube. The
edges of the cube correspond to the end over which the robot
has to roll to move to an adjacent equilateral triangle.
In this representation it is easy to see that the actuated
pattern is a dual to the strut connectivity pattern and is
therefore an effective way to deform the structure with low
power actuators.
The passive and active cables have inline springs with
low spring constants at 28.4N/m and 81N/m, respectively.
As a result, the natural frequencies of oscillatory modes for
the structure are on the order of a few Hz. While it is not
necessary to add springs to the actuated cables, we found
that removing the stiffer springs of these cables results in a
signiﬁcant reduction in compliance of the structure, which
can be problematic during impact.
ReCTeR is equipped with low power DC motors (4.5W
brushed DC, Maxon 216000) with a single stage plastic
gearbox (4.4:1, Maxon 112862). It is crucial to prevent
the tensile forces on the actuated springs from exerting
an excessive radial load on the motor axis. Therefore, two
miniature ball bearings secure the motor axis (one is mounted
inside the bottom of the spindle, one is mounted at the end
of the spindle). The current design can shorten the actuated
cables at a rate of 0:3m=s and we observed active unwinding
speeds of over 0:6m=s. The estimated effective (gears and
bearings) nominal motor output is 3:5W .
1
The tensegrity icosahedron is not an exact icosahedron, as the parallel
struts are l=2 spaced apart, where l is the length of a strut.
3485
Fig. 3. ReCTeR connection pattern. Left: The thin green lines are passive
springs (outer shell), the thick full red lines are struts and the dashed
blue lines are actuated springs. Right: A different representation of the
connectivity, showing how the actuated springs are dual to the struts. The
large circles are equilateral triangular faces (cf. [5, Fig. 5b]) connected by
edges representing the end caps (small circles) over which the robot has to
roll to reach an adjacent face. The thick black lines represent the struts and
the thin lines are the actuated springs, which form the same spatial structure
as the struts in the representation on the left.
We used 20kg UHMWPE wires for the passive outer
shell cables. The actuated cables are 7kg UHMWPE wires
(0:13mm diameter). We opted for an open node design to
prevent wires getting caught. To this end, a PTFE cap ﬁts
tightly around the top and bottom of the spindle, separating
the ball bearing and axis from the cable and providing a
low friction surface for the wires when the robot is highly
deformed.
Each strut is self-contained and fully wireless by uti-
lizing a central module with battery power and wireless
communication (Nordic nRF24L01+). The battery (Pana-
sonic NCR18650A) is mounted in the center of the strut
to minimize the moment of inertia around its longitudinal
axis. ReCTeR has a battery runtime of about 1h with all
systems active. The wireless link achieves a robust controller
frequency of up to 100Hz, but we currently control the robot
from an external computer at 40Hz as faster control is not
needed due to the inherent compliance of the structure.
B. Sensors
ReCTeR is outﬁtted with various sensors. First of all
24 tension sensors (four per actuated end cap, see Fig. 2)
provide feedback about the deformation of the robot. The
ADC (24bit Analog AD7192) is located on a PCB mounted
above the motor spindle. To measure the motor position, a
magnetic encoder (AMS AS5050) is located on the bottom
of the circuit board that houses the ADC. Each actuated end
cap also features ground reaction force sensors based on a
common force sensitive resistor integrated into the end cap.
Furthermore, a 6-DOF inertial measurement unit is located
on each central module.
III. EVOLVED DESIGN GOALS
A. Lessons Learned from ReCTeR
While ReCTeR exceeds its design goals - sensor feedback,
locomotion and folding - it has a number of limitations,
which prevents it from being used as a general modular
tensegrity robot platform.
First, the lightweight design cannot transport any signif-
icant scientiﬁc payload, which is a major feature for any
planetary exploration mission.
The exposed spring design of ReCTeR becomes a safety
issue when increasing the robot’s mass (and thus spring
tension). It is also difﬁcult to mechanically limit the max-
imum spring extension to prevent plastic deformation (e.g.
in case of a heavy external load). SUPERball will therefore
feature an encapsulated spring design, which overcomes both
problems and simpliﬁes assembly.
Robustness was not a primary design goal, but the proto-
type turned out to be more robust than expected. Extensive
experiments (drop tests, rolling, reassembly and folding)
have not resulted in any major mechanical or electrical
failure. In future designs, we will aim for even more mod-
ularity and decentralization as a failure of a central module
will now result in the failure of two actuators. We also
aim to implement part of the control algorithms (e.g. CPG
generation) locally, as to enable robust locomotion even in
case of temporary communication failure.
ReCTeR is capable of dynamic locomotion, but has to
achieve this by making use of the energy stored in the
springs. As our calculations show that almost all parts of a
tensegrity robot scale favorably in terms of speciﬁc strength,
our goal is to obtain a ﬁnal power-to-weight ratio about
four times higher in SUPERball (100W=kg vs. 25W=kg
for ReCTeR). This permits locomotion and manipulation
experiments in any situation and state (i.e. outside an energy
efﬁcient regime).
IV. SUPERBALL AND THE MODULAR TENSEGRITY
ROBOT PLATFORM
In order to develop SUPERball from ReCTeR’s design
limitations as well as our lab’s need for rapid experimentation
of various tensegrity conﬁgurations and morphologies, we
came up with a modular tensegrity platform to research
large scale robotic tasks; e.g. a tensegrity planetary probe
to explore Saturn’s moon Titan.
A. Design Requirements
Our lab obtained design requirements through an iterative
approach involving NTRT and ReCTeR. As we recently
validated our NTRT simulator by experimental validation
with ReCTeR [28], we can now quickly evaluate various
tensegrity conﬁgurations in simulation to ﬁnd optimal me-
chanical design goals. Next to the NTRT solver, we also
incorporated results obtained with our (open source) Euler
Lagrange solver based on Skelton’s work [17] and measure-
ments on ReCTeR.
The design requirements obtained from the NTRT simula-
tions are given in Table I. We are conﬁdent that a tensegrity
3486
Fig. 4. Modular tensegrity platform strut design. To increase robustness and modularity, each end cap is fully independent and connects to other components,
end caps or external controllers over WiFi or CAN. The compression spring design is safer than a mechanically more straightforward external extension
spring design and also allows for spring tension sensing independent of the angle of cable with respect to the strut. The longer compression spring attaches
to a cable that is not actuated, while the short, stiffer spring will attach to an actuated cable from another end cap. The complete spring assembly slides
into an aluminum tube that connects both end caps.
robot achieving the following conditions will be capable of
dynamic locomotion, as shown by our evaluation of control
policies in Section V.
TABLE I
SUPERBALL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
lstrut l k
passive
Ctrl. freq. max
ReCTeR 1m 0:3m=s 28:4N=m 40Hz 0:03Nm
SUPERball 1:5m 0:26m=s 500N=m 100Hz 3Nm
In Table I,l
strut
is the length of a strut, l the rate of of
length change (the change in rest length of the inline spring)
of an actuated cable and max the maximum spindle output
torque.
B. Mechanical Design
SUPERball is an icosahedron tensegrity structure com-
prised of 12 motors at the end of the robot’s 6 rods. Each
rod is comprised of three main elements, 2 modular end
cap assemblies containing all the mechanical and electrical
systems and a connecting aluminum tube as a support
structure. The main structural elements of the end caps were
kept simple and in sections to enable each end cap to be
modular as well as self contained so that the end cap may
be removed from the connecting rod as one whole unit. The
end caps are held onto the connecting rods by a simple
tube collar for easy removal. There are 5 sections to the
modular end cap which are, a spring holder, battery holder,
motor and electronics element, cable actuation section, and a
ground contact section. These sections as they are designed
for SUPERball are shown in Fig. 4. Each of these 5 sections
can be removed from the rod as a full sub-assembly and
replaced with a new component, increasing the versatility of
each rod.
A lesson learned from ReCTeR was that externally ex-
posed springs are not ideal for a robotic system. The exposed
springs get caught on objects and the assumption of massless
cables can no longer be applied. On the modular end cap
for SUPERball, an enclosed compression spring system was
developed to alleviate these issues. Compression springs
were chosen so that during any unknown impact, the springs
would not plastically deform. For SUPERball, a spring with
a spring constant of 613N=m is attached to a passive cable
element and a 2850N=m spring is attached to an actuated
cable. The passive spring has a much higher compressive
range to allow for pretension to be instated into the passive
springs. A working prototype of our spring holder system
can be seen in Fig. 5.
Fig. 5. Behavior of the inner tube compression spring design of an end cap.
External cables attached to other end caps run into the tube and attach to
one of two springs. Each spring is ﬁtted with a custom compression sensor
for spring tension sensing independent of the angle of the external cable.
The whole assemble slides into an aluminum tube, allowing for various
conﬁgurations and strut lengths.
3487
C. Electrical and Sensor Design
SUPERball was developed with distributed controls in
mind. Each rod end cap houses two control boards, one
for motor driving and one for handling sensing and com-
munications. Each board hosts a Microchip dsPIC33EP. The
motor driver is a BLDC/PMSM driver board capable of block
commutation and sensorless sinusoidal control. Each sensor
board is equipped with an ADC (24bit Analog AD7193) and
9 DOF IMU data (MPU6000 and MAG3110).
Two custom force sensors were developed for the SUPER-
ball, a reaction torque sensor and a compression force sensor.
Fig. 6 shows the reaction torque sensor. It is a symmetrical
four arm cross design with the half bridge located in the
center of each arm. This sensor, along with the compression
sensors and current sensors allow us to implement high level
control schemes such as impedance control in which the full
state of the mechanical and electrical system must be known.
Fig. 6. Close-up of the motor assembly. A strain gauge based torque sensor
senses the force on the actuated cable. The receiving strut can also locally
sense this force by one of the spring compression sensors. The passive
cables run into end cap below the spindle and are guided through the end
cap to the compression springs.
V. LEARNING CONTROL POLICIES
The rolling locomotion for an icosahedron tensegrity robot
is an ongoing research area [26][5]. The goal is to reach a
smooth rolling behavior by changing the lengths of (some)
of the cables that form the structure. In this section, the 6
strut SUPERball conﬁguration and constraints were modeled
in the NASA Tensegrity Robotics Toolkit (NTRT)
2
. We show
the results of a new method for learning to roll by exploiting
the symmetry of the structure, combined with coevolutionary
algorithms.
The notion of rolling of an icosahedron tensegrity can be
considered as consecutive ﬂops made one after the other.
For each speciﬁc ﬂop, we study the movement of a static
structure standing on a base equilateral triangle (i.e. one of
the eight faces, as shown in Fig. 3) and rotating itself over
one of the sides of this triangle. This method will enable
2
The NTRT simulator is open source software, available at
http://ti.arc.nasa.gov/tech/asr/intelligent-robotics/tensegrity/
the structure to move from one static position to another
by destabilizing the system to ﬂop along one side of the
equilateral triangles.
Although rolling is now simpliﬁed to one ﬂop, the control
problem remains challenging. Coevolutionary algorithms are
a natural ﬁt to solve controlling this compliant, non linear
system [29].
The ﬁtness function used is the distance that the robot rolls
over a ﬁxed period of time. Using this experimental setup,
the coevolutionary algorithms optimized the move of a ﬂop
to achieve smooth rolling when the policy is applied for a
series of ﬂops.
The advantage of a symmetric structure is that once we
have learned a controller for rolling in a single direction, the
learned policy can then be used for rolling in any direction.
The robot can be controlled to go in a speciﬁc direction using
a series of ﬂops over the closest edge of the base triangle.
Fig. 7 and 8 show the result of a controllable learned rolling
motion with low tensions.
Fig. 7. Controllable rolling with a learned controller. After learning a
control policy, the symmetry of the structure can be used to control the
direction. The plot show the robot’s center of mass. The zigzag is due to
the robot rolling over a sequence of equilateral triangular faces.
Fig. 8. Spring tensions for the trajectory in Fig. 7. A relatively low average
tension of 75N keeps the structure in tension, with peak forces up to 200N
due the actuators.
The main goal of this section was to verify if a tensegrity
robot based on the proposed design parameters would be
capable of dynamic locomotion. We omit the details of the
locomotion algorithm and coevolutionary learning here, since
the topic of this paper is the design of our modular robot
platform.
3488
VI. CONCLUSION
Like other areas of soft-robotics, the ﬁeld of tensegrity
robotics is just starting to be explored now that the compu-
tational power and control theories exist to start the practical
exploration of tensegrity robots interacting with the environ-
ment. Until now, the vast majority of realized hardware pro-
totypes have been rudimentary proof-of-concepts systems,
relying on servomotors, limited sensing, and/or being teth-
ered in lab settings for power and data (or compressed air for
pneumatic muscles). We are developing and validating some
of the ﬁrst purpose-engineered tensegrity component systems
which are designed to robust engineering standards of self-
contained power, actuation, sensing, and communications.
Our goal is to enable the global community of tensegrity
robotics researchers to be able to rapidly explore and develop
new tensegrity robots, using a toolkit of modular components
capable of meeting the unique needs of tensegrity robots. In
this paper we have shared our approach, design methodology,
engineering requirements, and early results from construction
of our ﬁrst components. We look forward to reporting
locomotion results once we have assembled the complete
system of tensegrity components.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was supported by the NASA Innovative
Advanced Concepts (NIAC) program and NASA’s Human
Robotic Systems (HRS) project, Game Changing Devel-
opments (GCD) Program, both in the Space Technology
Mission Directorate (STMD). Support also came from NASA
Prime Contract Number NAS2-03144 awarded to the Univer-
sity of California, Santa Cruz, University Afﬁliated Research
Center. Further support came from the European Com-
munity’s Seventh Framework Programme FP7/2007-2013
Challenge 2 Cognitive Systems, Interaction, Robotics under
grant agreement No 248311 - AMARSi. Ken Caluwaerts
was supported by a PhD fellowship of the Research Foun-
dation Flanders (FWO). Andrew Sabelhaus was supported
by an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship (DGE 1106400).
The authors would like to thank Adrian Agogino, Michiel
D’Haene, Terry Fong, Jeffrey Friesen, George Gorospe, Chris
Hartney, Sarah Hovsepian, George Korbel, Sophie Milam,
Kyle Morse, In Won Park, Alexandra Pogue, Matthew
Reyes, Benjamin Schrauwen, Brian Tietz, Kagan Tumer,
Tim Waegeman, Francis wyffels, the NASA Ames Intelligent
Robotics Group and the NASA Ames SpaceShop.
REFERENCES
[1] R. B. Fuller, Synergetics: Explorations in the Geometry of Thinking.
Scribner, Jan. 1975.
[2] K. Snelson, “Continuous tension, discontinuous compression struc-
tures. United States patent 3169611,” February 1965.
[3] N. Wang, J. D. Tytell, and D. E. Ingber, “Mechanotransduction at
a distance: Mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the
nucleus.” Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, vol. 10, no. 1, pp.
75–82, 2009.
[4] N. Wang, K. Naruse, D. Stamenovi´ c, J. J. Fredberg, S. M. Mijailovich,
I. M. Toli´ c-Nørrelykke, T. Polte, R. Mannix, and D. E. Ingber,
“Mechanical behavior in living cells consistent with the tensegrity
model.” PNAS, vol. 98, no. 14, pp. 7765–7770, Jul 2001.
[5] Y . Koizumi, M. Shibata, and S. Hirai, “Rolling tensegrity driven by
pneumatic soft actuators,” in ICRA, 2012, pp. 1988–1993.
[6] J. Mirats-Tur and J. Camps, “A three-dof actuated robot,” Robotics
Automation Magazine, IEEE, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 96–103, Sept 2011.
[7] J. Mirats-Tur, “On the movement of tensegrity structures,” Interna-
tional Journal of Space Structures, vol. 25, pp. 1–14, 2010.
[8] V . Webster, A. Lonsberry, A. Horchler, K. Shaw, H. Chiel, and
R. Quinn, “A segmental mobile robot with active tensegrity bending
and noise-driven oscillators,” in Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics
(AIM), 2013 IEEE/ASME International Conference on, July 2013, pp.
1373–1380.
[9] M. Khazanov, B. Humphreys, W. Keat, and J. Rieffel, “Exploiting
dynamical complexity in a physical tensegrity robot to achieve lo-
comotion,” in Advances in Artiﬁcial Life, ECAL, vol. 12, 2013, pp.
965–972.
[10] V . Bohm and K. Zimmermann, “Vibration-driven mobile robots based
on single actuated tensegrity structures,” in ICRA, May 2013, pp.
5475–5480.
[11] J. Rieffel, R. J. Stuk, F. J. Valero-Cuevas, and H. Lipson, “Locomotion
of a tensegrity robot via dynamically coupled modules,” in Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Morphological Computation,
Venice Italy, 2007.
[12] G. Tibert, “Deployable tensegrity structures for space applications,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Royal Institute of Technology, 2002.
[13] A. Agogino, V . SunSpiral, and D. Atkinson, “Super Ball Bot -
structures for planetary landing and exploration,” NASA Innovative
Advanced Concepts (NIAC) Program, Final Report, 2013.
[14] V . SunSpiral, G. Gorospe, J. Bruce, A. Iscen, G. Korbel, S. Milam,
A. Agogino, and D. Atkinson, “Tensegrity based probes for planetary
exploration: Entry, descent and landing (EDL) and surface mobility
analysis.” International Journal of Planetary Probes, July 2013.
[15] S. H. Juan and J. M. M. Tur, “Tensegrity frameworks: Static analysis
review,” Mechanism and Machine Theory, vol. 43, no. 7, pp. 859 –
881, 2008.
[16] N. Bel Hadj Ali, L. Rhode-Barbarigos, A. Pascual Albi, and I. Smith,
“Design optimization and dynamic analysis of a tensegrity-based
footbridge,” Engineering Structures, vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 3650–3659,
2010.
[17] R. E. Skelton and M. C. De Oliveira, Tensegrity Systems, 2009th ed.
Springer, June 2009.
[18] C. Paul, F. J. Valero-Cuevas, and H. Lipson, “Design and control
of tensegrity robots for locomotion,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 22, no. 5, Oct. 2006.
[19] J. M. M. Tur and S. H. Juan, “Tensegrity frameworks: Dynamic
analysis review and open problems,” Mechanism and Machine Theory,
vol. 44, pp. 1–18, 2009.
[20] R. Skelton and J. Mirats-Tur, “Nonlinear control of non-minimal
tensegrity models,” in Decision and Control, 2009 held jointly with the
2009 28th Chinese Control Conference. CDC/CCC 2009. Proceedings
of the 48th IEEE Conference on, Dec 2009, pp. 6662–6667.
[21] M. Shibata, F. Saijyo, and S. Hirai, “Crawling by body deformation
of tensegrity structure robots,” in ICRA, may 2009, pp. 4375 –4380.
[22] M. Cefalo and J. M. Mirats Tur, “Real-time self-collision detection
algorithms for tensegrity systems,” International Journal of Solids and
Structures, vol. 47, no. 13, pp. 1711–1722, 2010.
[23] S. Hernandez Juan, R. Skelton, and J. Mirats Tur, “Dynamically stable
collision avoidance for tensegrity based robots,” in Reconﬁgurable
Mechanisms and Robots, 2009. ReMAR 2009. ASME/IFToMM Inter-
national Conference on, June 2009, pp. 315–322.
[24] A. J. Ijspeert, “Central pattern generators for locomotion control in
animals and robots: a review.” Neural Networks, vol. 21, no. 4, pp.
642–53, May 2008.
[25] B. R. Tietz, R. W. Carnahan, R. J. Bachmann, R. D. Quinn, and
V . SunSpiral, “Tetraspine: Robust terrain handling on a tensegrity robot
using central pattern generators,” in AIM, 2013, pp. 261–267.
[26] A. Iscen, A. Agogino, V . SunSpiral, and K. Tumer, “Controlling
tensegrity robots through evolution,” in GECCO, 2013.
[27] K. Caluwaerts, M. D’Haene, D. Verstraeten, and B. Schrauwen, “Lo-
comotion without a brain: physical reservoir computing in tensegrity
structures,” Artiﬁcial Life, vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 35–66, 2013.
[28] K. Caluwaerts, J. Despraz, A. Iscen, J. Bruce, A. P. Sabelhaus,
B. Schrauwen, and V . SunSpiral, “Design and control of compliant
tensegrity robots through simulation and hardware validation,” Sub-
mitted, 2013.
[29] L. Panait, “Theoretical convergence guarantees for cooperative coevo-
lutionary algorithms,” Evolutionary Computation, vol. 18, pp. 581–
615, 2010.
3489
