  
  
Abstract—Single cell analysis has attracted much attention to 
reveal the localized biological information in detail. Local 
environmental control technique is developed to analyze the 
localized detail properties of single cells. In this paper, we 
propose the local environmental chemical stimulation system 
with micro dual pipettes to stimuli the local reagent 
concentration dynamically and automatically. Local 
environmental chemical stimulation by dual pipettes is applied 
to the rotational speed control of bacterial flagellar motor, 
which is a rotary molecular machine. Here, we show quick 
response and rotational speed control of Na
+
-driven flagellar 
motor in both accelerating and relaxing directions was 
demonstrated by automatic switching the local spout between 
Na
+
-containing and Na
+
-free solutions with dual pipettes. It was 
shown that the rotational speed could be maintained by 
automatic controlling the spouting velocity of Na
+
-containing 
and Na
+
-free solution with multiplying the applied DC voltage. 
Furthermore, it was confirmed that by applying the P-control, 
rotational speed of flagellar motor could be controlled more 
stably. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Single cell analysis has attracted much attention to reveal 
the detailed and localized biological information, which is 
not obtained by the conventional group cell analysis due to 
the statistical assay [1], [2], on individual cells [3], [4]. To 
analyze the detailed and localized properties of single cells, 
local environmental control technique, which is the technique 
to change and sense the local environment around single cells, 
is effective. The probe-type devices, such as pipettes, can be 
arbitrarily positioned by micro/nano manipulators [5]. And 
there is a possibility that the local environment can be 
controlled and measured with submicrometer-scale spatial 
resolution by the use of micro/nano-probes [6], [7]. Therefore, 
local environmental control technique with micropipettes, 
which are pipettes with a micrometer scale ejection/injection 
hole, is expected to get more detailed and localized 
information on single cells [8]. 
 
Manuscript received September 15, 2013. This work was partially 
supported by Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research on Innovative Areas 
(23106005, 24115507) from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, 
Science and Technology of Japan and Mirai-lab from Osaka University. 
Masaru Kojima, Takahiro Motoyoshi, Mitsuhiro Horade, Kazuto 
Kamiyama, Yasushi Mae, and Tatsuo Arai are with the Department of 
Systems Innovation, Osaka University, 1-3, Machikaneyama-cho, 
Toyonaka, Osaka, 560-8531, JAPAN (phone: +81-6-6850-6367 fax: 
+81-6-6850-6367; e-mail: kojima@rarai-lab.sys.es.osaka-u.ac.jp). 
Kenichi Ohara is with the Department of Mechatronics Engineering, 
Faculty of Science and Technology, Meijo University, 1-501 
Shiogamaguchi, Tenpaku, Nagoya, Aichi 468-8502, JAPAN 
Many bacteria can swim in liquid by rotating their 
flagella and migrate toward favorable directions by using 
different two swimming mode (Fig. 1). The bacterial 
flagellum has a helical filament that works as a propeller. 
Each flagellum consists of the helical filament extending 
from the cell body, the basal body embedded in the cell 
surface, and the flexible hook that connects them [9]–[12]. 
More than 20 structural proteins are required for this motor 
(see Fig. 1 underlying schematics). The bacterial flagellar 
motor is a molecular machine that converts ion-motive force 
(IMF) into mechanical force; the energy source of the 
rotation is the electrochemical gradient of H
+
 or Na
+
 ion 
across the cytoplasmic membrane. The stator of the flagellar 
motor consists of PomA and PomB in the Na
+
-driven motors 
of Vibrio alginolyticus, (V. alginolyticus) or MotA and MotB 
in the H
+
-driven motors of Escherichia coli (E. coli) 
[13]–[15]. These stator complexes are thought to function as 
Control of Flagellar Motor Using a Real-time Local Environment 
Chemical Stimulation System 
Masaru Kojima, Member, IEEE, Takahiro Motoyoshi, Kenichi Ohara, Member, IEEE,	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 
Mitsuhiro Horade, Member, IEEE,  Kazuto Kamiyama, Member, IEEE,                                      
Yasushi Mae, Member, IEEE and Tatsuo Arai, Member, IEEE 
 
Tumbling!
Clockwise!
Smooth swimming!
Counterclockwise!
Attractant concentration! Low                                                   High     !
 
 
Fig. 1. Schematic of the swimming bacterial behavior and flagellar 
motor. 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4699
  
specific ion channels. Furthermore, it is already revealed that 
chimeric protein PotB (the C-terminal domain of B subunit of 
V. alginolyticus was exchanged by E. coli) act as the 
Na
+
-driven type. Detailed single cell analysis revealed the 
step size of the flagellar motor rotation [16]. However, the 
mechanism of the flagellar motor rotation is still largely 
unknown. Therefore, new approach or method has been 
desired, and the local environmental stimulation with 
micropipettes can be a new approach for this issue. 
In fact, Piper et al. used a glass nanopipette for local and 
repeatable delivery of water-soluble reagent in ionic solution 
to make localized controlled changes in reagent concentration 
on a surface [17]. Then they applied their method to control 
the Na
+
-driven flagellar motor in single E. coli cell by dosing 
Na
+
 ions. Observing the dynamic response of flagellar motor 
like this will make a great contribution to clarify the 
mechanism of the flagellar motor rotation. However, their 
system is not enough to make an intended dynamic change in 
reagent concentration. When they dose Na
+
 ions to accelerate 
the rotational speed of Na
+
-driven flagellar motor, they can 
only wait for diffusion of Na
+
 ions to relax the rotational 
speed. If both drastic increase and decrease in Na
+
 ion 
concentration can be generated, it will be possible to observe 
the flagellar dynamic response independent from the 
influence of the Na
+
 ion diffusion. Therefore, the method to 
stimuli the local reagent concentration more dynamically is 
desired for more detailed analysis of the mechanism of the 
flagellar motor rotation. From this viewpoint, Nogawa et al. 
suggested dual pipettes system, which realize dynamic and 
arbitrary changes in local reagent concentration [18]. 
However this suggested system was regulated by manual 
control and time resolution is video rate (30 fps). 
Furthermore, analysis has done with offline calculation. 
Therefore this system could not achieve online control. These 
specifications are not enough to analyze detail phenomenon 
of biology. 
In this paper, we propose the improved local 
environmental chemical stimulation system with micro dual 
pipettes to produce the dynamically and automatically change 
in local reagent concentration. We developed new system 
that integrates dual pipettes system and high speed camera 
system as shown Fig. 2. In this system, the spouting amount 
from the pipette is regulated by the rotation measurement 
information from high speed camera and automatically 
controlled by computer with D/A board. The rotational speed 
of the Na
+
-driven flagellar motor in single E. coli cell is 
automatically controlled in both accelerating and relaxing 
directions by switching the local spout between 
Na
+
-containing and Na
+
-free solutions with dual pipettes. 
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Fabrication of Glass Micropipette 
Glass micropipettes are fabricated by heating and pulling 
the borosilicate glass tubes (outer/inner diameters are each 1 
mm/0.6 mm; GD-1, Narishige, Japan) with the puller (PC-10, 
Narishige, Japan). Its diameter of the tip can be controlled by 
the heating power, load, pulling velocity, etc. In this paper, 
glass micropipettes with a ~1 µm inner diameter were used. 
B. Bacterial Strains 
In this paper, E. coli mutant strain, which has Na
+
-driven 
chimeric flagellar motor, was used for the experiment of 
flagellar rotational speed control. E. coli mutant strain YS34 
(?cheY, fliC::Tn10, ?pilA, ?motAmotB) was transformed 
with plasmids pYS11 (fliC sticky filaments, ampicillin 
(Amp) resistance) and pYS13 (pomApotB, 
isopropyl-?-Dthiogalactoside (IPTG) inducible, 
chloramphenicol (Cm) resistance) [16]. Cell samples were 
prepared in the following procedure and cultured for 
experiment. First, cells were grown overnight at 30 
?
C with 
shaking in LB medium (1% (in weight/volume) bacto 
tryptone, 0.5% (in weight/volume) yeast extract, and 0.5% (in 
weight/volume) NaCl) containing the appropriate antibiotics 
(Cm and Amp). The overnight culture in LB medium was 
inoculated into TG medium (1% (in weight/volume) bacto 
tryptone, 0.5% (in weight/volume) NaCl, and 0.5% (in 
weight/volume) Grycerol) containing the appropriate 
antibiotics and the inducer  (Cm, Amp, and IPTG) at a 
tenfold dilution and grown at 30 
?
C for 3 h. Then, cells were 
centrifuged by centrifuge (1130, Kubota, Japan) in a 
centrifuging tube at 6000 rpm/min for 5 min. The sedimented 
cells were suspended in 1.5 mL Na+-motility medium (10 
mM potassium phosphate (pH 7.0), 0.1 mM 
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), and 85 mM NaCl), 
Na+-containing solution. 
C. Experimental Set Up for Rotational Speed Measurement 
of Flagellar Motor 
In this paper, tethered cells were used for the experiment 
of the rotational speed control of the Na
+
-driven flagellar 
motor. Generally, it is difficult to directly observe and 
measure the rotational speed of the flagellum under the 
optical microscope because of its ultrathin filament and 
high-speed rotation. “Tethered cells” mean the cells whose 
flagella are attached onto a substrate [19]. When the flagella 
of a cell are attached onto a substrate, cell bodies rotate as a 
result.  Thus, in these experiments, tethered cells are used to 
observe rotational speed of flagellum by observing rotational 
speed of the cell body. YS34/pYS11/pYS13 used in this 
paper is not only Na
+
-driven type, but it is suitable for 
making tethered cells because of the special flagellar filament 
called “sticky filament,” which easily sticks to a substrate. Its 
flagella rotate only in the counterclockwise direction by 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Schematic of the real-time local environment stimulation 
System. 
4700
  
rpm. Fig. 7 shows the time-series data of the rotational speed 
of the single cell body controlled by on/off regulation. In this 
control, controller switch the out put voltage Na+-containing 
to Na+-free solution, when rotational speed exceeds 350 rpm. 
On the other hand, controller switch the out put voltage 
Na+-free to Na+-containing solution, when the rotational 
speed become less than 350 rpm. From this result, we 
confirm that rotational speed was kept around 350 rpm 
automatically. However, these values are fluctuated. To 
improve these fluctuations, we applied P-control for 
controlling spout amount from micropipette.  
Fig. 8 shows comparison data of (a) on/off control, (b) P 
control [Kp: 0.16], and (c) P control [Kp: 0.32]. These data 
are the results of 5 sec after the stimulus. We calculate 
parameter value of P-control from step stimulation result and 
typical data of P control are shown in Fig. 8. Compare with 
on/off control and P control [Kp: 0.32], fluctuation was 
improved. Average of on/off control is 362 rpm and 
dispersion is 301 rpm, on the other hand, average of P control 
[Kp: 0.32] is 338 rpm and dispersion is 174 rpm. These 
results show that the rotational speed of Na
+
-driven flagellar 
motor was controllable by controlling the spouting volume or 
velocity of Na
+
-containing solution with changing the applied 
DC voltage.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed the improved local 
environmental chemical stimulation system with micro dual 
pipettes and high speed camera, and realized to control the 
local reagent concentration dynamically and automatically. 
Then, local environmental chemical stimulation by dual 
pipettes was applied to the rotational speed control of 
bacterial flagellar motor, which is a rotary molecular 
machine. Quick response and rotational speed control of 
Na
+
-driven flagellar motor in both accelerating and relaxing 
directions was demonstrated by switching the local spout 
between Na
+
-containing and Na
+
-free solutions with dual 
pipettes. Then it was shown that the rotational speed could 
be maintained automatically by controlling the spouting 
velocity of Na
+
-containing and Na
+
-free solution with 
multiplying the applied DC voltage. Furthermore, it was 
confirmed that by applying the P-control, rotational speed of 
flagellar motor could be controlled more stably. This local 
environmental chemical stimulation system with dual 
pipettes will make a great contribution to clarify the 
mechanism of the flagellar motor rotation through getting 
the information on the dynamic response. Therefore, we will 
improve time resolution of our system as future work. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank M. Homma and S. Kojima for providing 
bacterial strains; K. Nogawa for help for system setup and 
useful discussions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. V. Rao, D. M. Wolf, and A. P. Arkin, “Control, exploitation and 
tolerance of intracellular noise,” Nature, vol. 420, pp. 231–137, 2002. 
[2] J. M. Raser and E. K. O’Shea, “Noise in gene expression: Origins, 
consequences, and control,” Science, vol. 309, pp. 2010–2013, 2005. 
[3] S. Yamamura, H. Kishi, Y. Tokimitsu, S. Kondo, R. Honda, S. R. Rao, 
M. Omori, E. Tamiya, and A. Muraguchi, “Single-cell microarray for 
analyzing cellular response,” Anal. Chem., vol. 77, pp. 8050–8056, 
2005. 
[4] D. D. Carlo, N. Aghdam, and L. P. Lee, “Single-cell enzyme 
concentrations, kinetics, and inhibition analysis using high-density 
hydrodynamic cell isolation arrays,” Anal. Chem., vol. 78, pp. 
4925–4930, 2006. 
[5] H. Uehara, T. Osada, and A. Ikai, “Quantitative measurement of 
mRNA at different loci within an individual living cell,” 
Ultramicroscopy, vol. 100, pp. 197–201, 2004. 
[6] H. Elshimy, M. Nakajima, Y. Imaizumi, F. Arai, and T. Fukuda, 
“Fabrication of FIB-CVD nano temperature sensors for local 
temperature sensing in water environments,” J. Robot.Mechatron., vol. 
19, no. 5, pp. 512–518, 2007. 
[7] X. Chen, A. Kis, A. Zettl, and C. R. Bertozzi, “A cell nanoinjector 
based on carbon nanotubes,” Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 104, pp. 
8218–8222, 2007. 
[8] L. Ying, A. Bruckbauer, D. Zhou, J. Gorelik, A. Shevchuk, M. Lab, 
Y.Korchevb, andD.Klenerman, “The scanned nanopipette:Anewtool 
for high resolution bioimaging and controlled deposition of 
biomolecules,” Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., vol. 7, pp. 2859–2866, 
2005. 
[9] R. Macnab, “Flagella and motility,” in Eschericia coli and Salmonella, 
F. C. Neidhardt, Chief-Ed.Washington, DC: American Society 
forMicrobiology, 1996, pp. 123–145. 
[10] T. Yorimitsu and M. Homma, “Na+ -driven flagellar motor of vibrio,” 
Biochim. Biophys. Acta, vol. 1505, pp. 82–93, 2001. 
[11] P. Aldridge and K. T. Hughes, “Regulation of flagellar assembly,” 
Curr. Opin. Microbiol., vol. 5, pp. 160–165, 2002. 
[12] S. Kojima and D. F. Blair, “The bacterial flagellar motor: Structure 
and function of a complex molecular machine,” Int. Rev. Cytol., vol. 
233, pp. 93–134, 2004. 
[13] Y. Asai, S. Kojima, H. Kato, N. Nishioka, I. Kawagishi, and M. 
Homma, “Putative channel components for the fast-rotating 
sodium-driven flagellar motor of a marine bacterium,” J. Bacteriol., 
vol. 179, no. 16, pp. 5104– 5110, 1997. 
[14] G. E. Dean, R. M. Macnab, J. Stader, P. Matsumura, and C. Burks, 
“Gene sequence and predicted amino acid sequence of the mota 
protein, a membrane-associated protein required for flagellar rotation 
in Escherichia coli,” J. Bacteriol., vol. 159, no. 3, pp. 991–999, 1984. 
[15] J. Stader, P. Matsumura, D. Vacante, G. E. Dean, and R. M. Macnab, 
“Nucleotide sequence of the Escherichia coli motb gene and 
site-limited incorporation of its product into the cytoplasmic 
membrane,” J. Bacteriol., vol. 166, no. 1, pp. 244–252, 1986. 
[16] Y. Sowa, A. D. Rowe, M. C. Leake, T. Yakushi, M. Homma, A. 
Ishijima, and R. M. Berry, “Direct observation of steps in rotation of 
the bacterial flagellar motor,” Nature, vol. 437, pp. 916–919, 2005. 
[17] J. D. Piper, C. Li, C.-J. Lo, R. Berry, Y. Korchev, L. Ying, and D. 
Klenerman, “Characterization and application of controllable local 
chemical changes produced by reagent delivery from a nanopipet,” J. 
Amer. Chem. Soc., vol. 130, pp. 10386–10393, 2008. 
[18] K. Nogawa, M. Kojima, M. Nakajima, S. Kojima, M. Homma, and T. 
Fukuda, "Rotational Speed Control of Na+-driven Flagellar Motor by 
Dual Pipettes", IEEE Transactions on Nanobioscience, Vol.8, No.4, 
pp. 341-348, (2009)  
[19] T. M. Truskett, “The subtleties of water in small spaces,” Proc. Nat. 
Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 100, no. 18, pp. 10139–10140, 2003. 
[20] Chung, S. H. and Kennedy, R. A. (1991). Forward-backward 
non-linear filtering technique for extracting small biological signals 
from noise. J Neurosci Methods 40, 71-86. 
[21]  K. Nogawa, Y. Tagawa, M. Nakajima, F. Arai, T. Shimizu, S. 
Kamiya, and T. Fukuda, “Development of novel nanopipette with a 
lipid nanotube as nanochannel,” J. Robot. Mechatron., vol. 19, no. 5, 
pp. 528–534, 2007. 
[22] M. Silverman and M. Simon, “Flagellar rotation and the mechanism 
of bacterial motility,” Nature, vol. 249, pp. 73–74, 1974. 
4704
