  
  
Abstract—The bio-inspired materials and bio-inspired 
robotics laboratory at the University of Tennessee developed a 
swimming robot with a rigid body and flexible propellers 
inspired from the whirligig beetle. We improved the propulsion 
efficiency by identifying the optimal structure for the propellers 
and beating patterns to minimize the energy consumption for 
this swimming robot. In this video, we present the design, 
simulation, and experiment of the robot platform. 
?. INTRODUCTION 
Whirligig beetle can achieve high swimming speed on 
the surface of water due to their unique leg morphologies [1, 
2]. The multi-jointed flat legs with moving hairs help it 
achieve a large contact area ratio of about 40 between the 
power stroke and the recovery stroke [3]. We designed an 
efficient swimming robot taking inspiration from the 
swimming mechanisms of the whirligig beetle. The propeller 
design is featured by the complaint structure and only one 
actuator at the proximal end. Compared with other 
biomimetic propellers, our design greatly enhanced the fluid 
force utilization through the appropriate oscillation of the 
propeller [4]. Additionally, the thrust and propulsion 
efficiency was further improved by optimizing the flexural 
rigidity along the propeller. Observations of the whirligig 
beetle show that the beetle and can reach a high speed with a 
curved trajectory [1, 5]. Adjusting the beating sequence and 
frequency will also help the insect reduce energy 
consumption while swimming. Simulation and experiments 
were conducted to identify the energy efficient beating 
sequence and beating frequency for the robot swimming.  
?. SWIMMING MECHANISM IMPLEMENTATION 
The robot platform was designed using Solidworks and 
fabricated by a STRATASYS 3D printer. The streamlined 
ellipsoidal body reduces the fluid resistance and maximizes 
the turning speed. The inertial measurement unit and power 
sensing circuit were integrated on a custom PCB for the 
purpose of monitoring the orientation, acceleration, and 
power consumption information. We fabricated several types 
of propellers using silicon rubber. The propellers were 
passively manipulated by the water during each beating cycle, 
which simplified the control problem. The flexural rigidity of 
 
Z. Chen and X. Jia are the Ph.D students of University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, USA (e-mail: zchen25@utk.edu, xjia8@utk.edu). 
A. Riedel is an undergraduate student of University of Tennessee, 
Knoxville, USA (e-mail: ariedel@utk.edu). 
M. Zhang is a professor of Department of Mechanical, Aerospace and 
Biomedical Engineering, The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, USA 
(e-mail:mingjunzhang@ieee.org). 
 
the robot can be modified by changing the rubber thickness. 
Through parameter optimization, we obtain the optimal 
flexural rigidity to maximize the thrust produced by each 
propeller and verified it through experimental comparison.  
?. BEATING PATTERNS OPTIMIZATION 
According to observation, beating patterns also affect 
the propulsion efficiency of whirligig beetle. Another 
optimization problem was formulated to minimize the energy 
consumption of the bio-inspired robot. First, a dynamics 
model was built using four multi-link propellers [6]. The best 
beating sequence and frequency was indentified through 
two-step optimal strategy [7]. Through simulation, we found 
that the optimized beating sequence caused the robot to 
oscillated in a sinuous-like manner, and generated a small 
S-shaped trajectory, which has been confirmed as efficient 
swimming for nature whirligig beetles. And we also found 
that the best beating frequency for our swimming robot was 
0.71 Hz. Several experiments were conducted on the robot 
platform in different scenarios to verify the results.  
?. CONCLUSIONS 
Inspired from the whirligig beetle, we found the best 
solution for energy efficient swimming mechanisms of a rigid 
body with four flexible propellers. The same principles will 
be investigated on micro-scale robot swimming propulsion 
mechanisms and underwater vehicles. 
ACKONWLEDGEMENTS 
This work was supported by the Office of Naval 
Research Young Investigator Program award 
(ONR-N00014-11-1-0622) under the supervision of Dr. T. 
McKenna. 
REFERENCE 
 [1] Z. Xu, S. C. Lenaghan, B. E. Reese, X. Jia, and M. Zhang, 
"Experimental Studies and Dynamics Modeling Analsis of the 
Swimming and Diving of Whirligig Beetles (Coleoptera:Gyrinidae)," 
PLoS Comput Biol, vol. 8, p. e1002792, 2012. 
[2] X. Gao and L. Jiang, "Biophysics: Water-repellent legs of water 
striders," Nature, vol. 432, pp. 36-36, 2004. 
[3] F. E. Fish and A. J. Nicastro, "Aquatic turning performance by the 
whirligig beetle: constraints on maneuverability by a rigid biological 
system," J. Exp. Biol., vol. 206, pp. 1649-1656, May 15, 2003. 
[4] J. Tangorra, P. Anquetil, T. Fofonoff, A. Chen, M. Del Zio, and I. 
Hunter, "The application of conducting polymers to a biorobotic fin 
propulsor," Bioinspiration & biomimetics, vol. 2, p. S6, 2007. 
[5] V. A. Tucker, "Wave-Making by Whirligig Beetles (Gyrinidae)," 
Science, vol. 166, pp. 897-899, November 14, 1969. 
[6]   M. Sato, M. Fukaya, and T. Iwasaki, "Serpentine locomotion with 
robotic snakes," Control Systems, IEEE, vol. 22, pp. 64-81, 2002. 
[7]    X. Jia, X. Li., S. Lenaghan, M. Zhang, "Design of Efficient Propulsion 
for Nanorobots," IEEE Trans. Robot., Accepted For Publication. 
A Bio-inspired Swimming Robot 
Zongyao Chen*, Xinghua Jia*, Andrew Riedel and Mingjun Zhang, Senior Member, IEEE 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
U.S. Government work not protected by
U.S. copyright
2564
