Self-assembling Sensors for Printable Machines
ByungHyun Shin, Samuel M. Felton, Michael T. Tolley, and Robert J. Wood
AbstractÑSelf-assembled structures and machines can be
made using origami-inspired manufacturing methods. In par-
ticular, self-folding of two-dimensional materials using shape
memory polymers and embedded electrical circuits has been
utilized to build robots and structures in an inexpensive and
rapid manner. In order to build increasingly complex and func-
tional self-folding machines, however, methods for interaction
with the environment are necessary. This paper presents and
characterizes three types of self-folding sensors: a mechanical
switch, a capacitive contact sensor, and a velocity sensor. We
utilize specialized fold patterns to create cyclic mechanical
linkagesaswellasadditionalcompositelayerssuchasmagnetic
sheets to build these sensors. We demonstrate the integration
of two of these sensors, the switch and the contact sensor, into
a lamp that can self-fold and immediately begin responding to
its surroundings.
I. INTRODUCTION
Origami-inspired manufacturing techniques can create
complex three-dimensional structures from planar materi-
als through methods that are inexpensive and rapid. With
the aid of computational geometry [1], [2], arbitrary fold
patterns can produce complex three-dimensional structures.
Applications of folding techniques appear in paper actuators
[3] and springs [4] as well as in programmable structures
[5], piezoresistive force sensors [6], and robots [7], [8]. Pop-
up book MEMS is an additional technique that enables the
self-assembly of complicated three-dimensional mechanisms
and millimeter-scale robots from two-dimensional composite
materials [9], [10].
Because of their low cost and speed, origami fabrication
methods can be used as a new type of printable manufac-
turing. While 3D printing enables the rapid manufacture
of custom prototypes in industry and research labs [11],
folded machines can offer additional advantages such as
decreased material usage and the ability to be stored or
transported in two-dimensional form [12], [13]. However,
as these machines and structures become more complex and
the number of folds grows rapidly, it becomes increasingly
difÞcult and time-consuming to fold these structures man-
ually. Enabling such structures to self-fold can reduce the
time and effort of building complicated machines from two-
dimensional materials.
In order to automate the assembly of machines, self-
folding has been assimilated into two-dimensional manufac-
turing methods. This provides the potential for autonomous
machine assembly and deployment. One particular method
combines shape-memory polymers (SMPs) and additional
The authors are with the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences and
the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Cambridge, MA 02138 bshin@college.harvard.edu
25 mm
Fig. 1. A self-assembled lamp operated by both a mechanical switch and by
a capacitive contact sensor. The lamp was fabricated as a two-dimensional
composite of paper, copper-polyimide, and prestretched-polystyrene. After
folding was induced by sequential application of two amperes of current to
resistive circuits, the lamp could be turned on and off by the switch or the
contact sensor.
composites into thin laminates. Self-folding is induced via
resistive heating circuits, triggering contraction of SMP lay-
ers along fold lines [14], [15], [16]. Prestretched polystyrene
(PSPS), an inexpensive SMP that can shrink up to 50% bi-
directionally when heated above about 95

C, is well-suited
for inducing the self-folding of various structures and devices
[17]. However, beyond geometry and structural properties,
one important aspect of self-folding machines is the ability
to sense and interact with the environment.
There are countless extant sensors, made by more tradi-
tional means, that can measure properties such as contact or
touch, proximity and distance, force, velocity, temperature,
and pressure. Furthermore, sensors may utilize a variety of
structures or methods to accomplish similar capabilities. For
example, mechanical contact switches may take the form of
latches [18], pushbuttons [19], and mercury switches [20].
Force can be measured by the displacement of a spring [21]
or a change in capacitance between two conductive plates
[22], [23]. Velocity can be measured with optical components
and analog electronics [24]. However, the majority of such
sensors are built with traditional manufacturing and assembly
methods, are often complex and expensive, and are usually
incompatible with the printable manufacturing process (other
than as discrete components).
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4417
+ + +
- - -
+ + + + + +
- - - - -
+ + + + + +
-
- - - -
- - -
+ +
a) b) c)
Fig. 2. The capacitive sensor consists of a copper plate (yellow) and
a dielectric layer consisting of paper (white) and tape (blue). (a) The
capacitance between the plate and the air is small. (b) When a Þnger comes
close to the capacitive sensor, the total capacitance increases. (c) When the
Þnger applies pressure to the sensor, the paper dielectric layer compresses,
increasing the capacitance further.
In this paper we present three types of sensors integrated
into the self-folding manufacturing process developed by
Felton et. al [15]. We have developed a capacitive contact
sensor, an electromagnetic velocity sensor, and a bi-stable
mechanical switch by adding additional composite layers
into the manufacturing process, incorporating features into
the existing layers and ßexible printed circuit board (PCB),
and by designing specialized fold patterns that form com-
plex mechanisms. Furthermore, we integrated two of these
sensors, the switch and capacitive contact sensor, into the
structure of a self-folding light-emitting diode (LED) lamp
(Fig. 1), demonstrating the efÞcacy of these sensors for
integration with rapidly manufactured self-folding machines.
II. DESIGN
The sensors we have developed build upon a printable
manufacturing technique that utilizes two-dimensional lay-
ered composites and sequential folding triggered by supplied
current [15]. In order to build printable sensors that can be
incorporated into this autonomous two-dimensional manufac-
turing process, we utilize a combination of new mechanisms
and additional composite layers.
A. Capacitive Contact Sensor
We designed a contact sensor that consists of an embedded
copper pad included in the ßexible PCB layer [15]. The
capacitance C of two parallel plates is given by:
C =e
A
d
(1)
where e is the relative permittivity, A is the area of overlap
between the plates, and d is the distance between them.
Without the presence of a second plate, the capacitance is
between the plate and the surrounding air or environment
(Fig. 2a). When a second conductive surface, such as a
human Þnger, approaches the Þrst, there is a measurable
increase in capacitance (Fig. 2b).
The printable sensor consists of a capacitive plate on the
same PCB as the resistive heating circuits used to actuate
folding of the structure. The dielectric material consists of
one layer of silicone tape and one layer of the paper substrate
used for support. In addition to detecting contact between the
Þnger and the dielectric material, we can measure the applied
force of a Þnger as the capacitance changes according to the
distance between the two conductive surfaces, the copper pad
and Þnger. When force is applied, the dielectric compresses,
? ?
?/2
? > 0 ? < 0
-V +V
Fig. 3. An illustration of the mechanism for the electromagnetic velocity
sensor. A Halbach array contains permanent magnets whose adjacent
magnetic dipoles are rotated 90

from one another, creating a strong
alternating magnetic Þeld on one side of the array. The sensor loop is
shaped periodically with a spatial period l to match the period of the
alternating magnetic Þeld. As the sensor moves across the top of the
sheet, an alternating magnetic ßux occurs through the copper loop, and
a proportional voltage is induced. In the top Þgure, the total ßux through
the sensor is f. When the sensor moves a distance l=2, the magnetic ßux
is now f.
acting as a spring whose displacement is proportional to the
applied force. Assuming constant area of overlap between the
two capacitive surfaces, we have a proportional relationship
between force and capacitance (Fig. 2c).
B. Velocity Sensor
We designed a velocity sensor that utilizes electromagnetic
induction to translate velocity into a measured voltage signal.
FaradayÕs law of induction states that the voltage V of a
closed loop of wire present in a magnetic Þeld is given by:
V = 
df
dt
(2)
where
df
dt
=
dB
dt
A (3)
and f is the total magnetic ßux through the wire, B is the
strength of the magnetic Þeld, and A is the total area of the
loop. We can induce a voltage by changing the strength of
the magnetic Þeld periodically.
We used a sheet of magnetic material arranged in a
Halbach array similar to that found in many refrigerator
magnets. A Halbach array is an array of magnets bonded
together such that adjacent magnetic dipoles are rotated 90

from each other. This produces an alternating magnetic Þeld
on one side of the array with a spatial frequency
1
l
. A
conductive loop of copper was fabricated with serpentine
coils running parallel to the magnetic poles and spaced at the
same frequency over the surface of a Halbach array sheet.
When the coils are positioned directly over the northern poles
of the magnet, the magnetic ßux is at a maximum. When the
loop moves a half-period perpendicular to the poles, the coils
are then directly over the southern poles, and the magnetic
ßux through the loop is equal but opposite (Fig. 3). When
the loop moves relative to the magnetic array, the magnetic
ßux oscillates between the maximum and minimum ßux, and
a voltage is induced in the loop. We assume that
B=C sin
 
2p
l
x
!
(4)
4418
a)
b)
c)
d)
Fig. 4. The folding process of the cyclic four-bar linkage used in the switch
design. Blue hinges indicate passive hinges and gray the folding hinges. The
yellow locations indicate the contact points of the circuit. (a) The linkage in
planar form. (b) The linkage folds over on itself. (c) A trapping fold pushes
the links in place, creating a bi-stable mechanism. (d) The linkage in its
closed position. The yellow contact surfaces on the two links that pinch
together are held in place by the stiffness of the links and ßexures.
and the velocity v is a constant so that
x=vt (5)
where C is the maximum strength of the magnetic Þeld and
x is the relative distance traveled between the sensor and
the magnet. Differentiating eq. (4) with respect to x and
combining with eqs. (2), (3), and (5) results in
V = C
2p
l
cos
 
2p
l
vt
!
Av (6)
with
S =
2p
l
CA (7)
where the period and amplitude of the induced voltage V
are both proportional to the velocity v, and S is deÞned as a
signal coefÞcient with units
mVs
m
.
We designed a trace pattern that matches the spatial
frequency of the magnetic Þeld to maximize the induced
voltage that could be measured. By creating one movable
structure with the loop of wire and one stationary structure
with the magnetic sheet on it that constrains the movable
structure to a single degree of freedom, we can measure the
relative velocity between the two.
C. Bi-stable Switch
We developed a self-folding bi-stable switch based on a
four-bar linkage design for bi-stable compliant mechanisms
[25], [26]. The switch is self-assembled, utilizing sequential,
trapping folding to create a cyclic linkage containing two
passive hinges (Fig. 4). After folding and subsequent cooling
of the SMP, the now-static fold provides a restoring force
which is present even at the bi-stable points. This produces
constant contact between the two surfaces of adjacent links,
which can then be used to close an electrical circuit. The
dynamic hinges allow this four-bar linkage to move. The
switch is actuated by applying a force to overcome the energy
barrier of moving between the two stable states (Fig. 4d).
D. Self-assembling lamp
To demonstrate the utility of self-assembled sensors, we
created a self-folding lamp that incorporates a contact sensor
as a switch and a touch sensor to adjust the brightness of
the light. A folding pattern was developed to incorporate
the designs of the two sensors into the ßexible PCB layer,
creating one continuous folding structure. To adjust the
brightness with the capacitive touch sensor, an Arduino
microcontroller was used to measure the capacitance and
control the voltage output to the LED circuit.
III. FABRICATION
The self-folding devices in this paper were all fabricated
using methods consistent with those published in Felton
et al. [15]. The two-dimensional composites consist of a
layer of 510 mm paper substrate (Cold Press Bright, Epson),
one or two layers of 18 mm copper circuits on 25 mm
polyimide (AC181200R, DuPont), and a layer of prestretched
polystyrene (PSPS) (GraÞx Inkjet Printable Shrink Film,
GraÞx). The capacitive sensor was built using these three
layers (Fig. 5a). The contact switch and lamp required an
additional circuit layer underneath the heating circuit for an
additional current path controlled by the switch. After print-
ing solid-ink circuit patterns onto copper-clad polyimide,
the circuits were etched to remove excess copper using a
ferric chloride etch tank. The paper and PSPS layers were
cut using a CO2 laser cutter (VersaLaser 2.0, Universal
Laser Systems), aligned along with the circuit(s) using pin
alignment, then bonded together with 50 mm double-sided
a)
PSPS
Tape
Cu-P
Tape
Paper
Paper
Tape
Cu-P
Mag
Tape
Cu-P
Tape
Paper
Tape
PSPS
Cu-P
Tape
Foam
Tape
b) c) d)
Tape
Cu-P
Paper
Tape
Tape
Fig. 5. (a) The capacitive contact sensor consists of three layers: the PSPS,
copper-polyimide circuit, and paper substrate layer. (b) The contact switch
adds an additional copper-polyimide layer underneath the PCB, containing
a disconnected circuit, as well as a small piece of foam and copper to bridge
the break in the circuit. There is also another layer of paper between the
heating circuit and PSPS to utilize the paper as a lever arm [15]. (c-d) The
velocity sensor is made up of two separate layers: the sensing layer and
the support layer. (c) The support structure of the velocity sensor consists
of the normal laminates of PSPS, the PCB, and paper with an additional
magnetic sheet layer on top. (d) The sensing layer consists of PSPS, a
copper-polyimide PCB, a paper layer, a second paper layer, and the sensor
loop etched from copper-polyimide. It has two paper laminates: one to fold
into a handle and one to provide structure to the sensor loop.
4419
a) b)
25 mm
Fig. 6. (a) A bottom view of the capacitive contact sensor. The copper
pad (black) was integrated into the existing ßexible PCB layer that is used
to induce folding. (b) The top view of the capacitive contact sensor.
silicone tape (ARclad 7876, Adhesives Research). Wires and
other discrete components (e.g. the white LED used in the
lamp) were manually soldered to the composite prior to
folding.
The velocity sensor is composed of two separate compo-
nents: a sensing layer containing the loop of copper in which
voltage is induced and a support layer that wraps around the
sensing layer after folding to restrict the sensorÕs movement
to one degree of freedom. The sensing structure consisted of,
from top to bottom, an SMP layer, a heating circuit layer,
two layers of paper, and a sensing copper-clad polyimide
layer which contained the loop where voltage was measured
(Fig. 5c). We used one layer of paper to provide structural
rigidity to the copper-polyimide loop on the bottom and a
second to provide rigidity to the handle that folded up. The
support structure also contained a magnetic sheet (12 mil
Flexible magnetic sheeting, Magnum Magnetics) manually
cut and bonded to the top of the PSPS layer with silicone
tape (Fig. 5d).
The bi-stable switch had an extra layer consisting of a
0 1 2 3 4 5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
Force (N)
Capacitance (pF)
Fig. 7. (a) The measured capacitance as a function of applied force.
Measurements were taken at 0.5 N intervals between 0 and 5 N. After initial
contact, the relationship is approximately linear. Five sample measurements
were taken at each force. The error bars represent one standard deviation
from the mean.
a)
b)
c)
50 mm
Fig. 8. (a) A self-folded velocity sensor. (b) The sensor layer and support
layer are separate layers, but folded together in one process, as the support
layer folds over the sensor layer to constrain its movement. (c) A bottom
view of the sensor structure of the velocity sensor. The loops have spatial
frequency l to match the frequency of the magnetic Þeld, maximizing the
measurable voltage signal induced in this wire.
small piece of copper-clad polyimide and a piece of foam,
which were bonded together and on top of the SMP layer
(with silicone tape, prior to fold actuation) at the speciÞc
point where the contact would bridge the gap in an exposed
copper circuit (Fig. 5b). The foam, due to its softness,
allowed for the switch to more reliably maintain contact with
the circuit. An additional paper layer was inserted between
the PSPS and PCB to act as a lever arm and increase the
folding torque. The lamp was fabricated in the same manner
as the switch, but with a different fold pattern and shape.
IV. EVALUATION
We measured the capacitance of a standalone contact
sensor (Fig. 6) under varying amounts of force using a
surface-mount device tester (18910, Aven). We applied force
through a Þnger in increments of 0.49 N and measured the
sensor output. The sensor registered a noticeable jump in
capacitance when a Þnger touched the surface of the sensor,
and also demonstrated changing capacitance as more force
is applied. We applied 0 to 5 N to the surface of the sensor
and measured the capacitance, and the results demonstrate an
approximately linear relationship after initial surface contact
of 0.49 N (Fig. 7).
The velocity sensor successfully self-folded after sup-
plying the circuits with two amperes (Fig. 8). In order to
measure the voltage produced by the sensor, we ampliÞed
the signal from the sensor with an operational ampliÞer
(LM741, Texas Instruments) circuit with a gain of 459.33 and
measured using an Arduino. We moved the sensing structure
across the magnetic support structure at variable velocities
and measured the corresponding alternating voltage signal,
4420
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
Velocity (m/s)
Voltage (mV)
Fig. 9. The measured voltage from the velocity sensor as a function
of velocity. The relationship is approximately linear with an R
2
value of
0.8234.
recording the highest measured amplitude of the signal. The
velocities were measured via video recording (See Supp.
Video).
We measured the voltage output of the sensor at velocities
from 0 to 0.5 m/s, which varied in amplitude from 0 to 9 mV .
The measured voltage signal data displayed an approximately
linear relationship with the velocity and was characterized by
V = 19:2v with an R
2
value of 0.8234 where the voltage V
is in mV and velocity v is in m/s (Fig. 9). The measured
signal coefÞcient S was thus 19:2
mVs
m
.
A standalone bi-stable switch was built in order to demon-
strate the ability for the switch to self-fold. Two amperes
were supplied to the circuit sequentially, allowing the linkage
to successfully fold over on itself (Fig. 10).
The lamp, which included both the mechanical switch and
the contact sensor, successfully self-folded into the intended
structure (Fig. 11). The bi-stable switch was tested as a
a) b)
c) d)
10 mm 10 mm
50 mm 50 mm
Fig. 10. (a) Two-dimensional planar form of the contact switch before self-
folding and (b) after self-folding. (c) The cyclic four-bar linkage mechanism
of the contact switch in its open circuit position and (d) in its closed circuit
position. The foam helps maintain contact between the copper bridge and
the broken circuit.
a) b)
50 mm
Fig. 11. (a) The planar conÞguration of a lamp before self-folding. The
lamp incorporates the mechanical switch design and a capacitive contact
sensor. (b) A completed self-folding lamp.
component of the lamp by ßipping it manually and observing
the completion of the LED circuit. The switch turned the
lamp on 156 consecutive times, and was successfully ßipped
a total of 335 out of 350 times. To adjust the brightness of
the lamp based on the capacitive contact sensor, an Arduino
microcontroller was used to measure the capacitance and
control the voltage output to the LED circuit (See Supp.
Video). The capacitive sensor also successfully turned the
lamp on and off (See Supp. Video).
V. DISCUSSION
The capacitive contact sensor successfully detected the
touch of a human Þnger and demonstrates the potential to
measure applied force. Because the measured range of capac-
itance is very small, however, the signal is still susceptible to
noise such as nearby conductive objects and other electronic
devices, and may not be suitable for detecting forces smaller
than one Newton. However, a more compliant and thicker
dielectric material may be able to provide a greater range in
capacitance and thus more precise force measurements. We
also demonstrated here that capacitive sensors can be readily
integrated into the existing PCB layer. Further applications
of this type of capacitive sensor can include a positional
sensor or touchpad by combining multiple capacitive copper
surfaces in a line or a lattice pattern to measure the location
and amount of force of a touch. A second mobile capacitive
surface may be added as an additional layer in order to
measure position or velocity. Capacitive sensors embedded
in the structure may also be applied for detecting fold
angles and providing feedback during assembly into a three-
dimensional structure. This may provide a useful tool in
automating the self-assembly process.
The velocity sensor demonstrated the ability to self-fold
two-dimensional structures that incorporate magnetic Þelds
and materials. The predicted signal coefÞcientS was 98:3
mVs
m
given a measured magnetic Þeld value of 9.2 mT at the
surface of the magnetic sheet, an area of the surface enclosed
by the copper loop 2720 mm
2
, and a spatial frequency l
of 1.6 mm. The difference between the measured signal
coefÞcient S of 19:2
mVs
m
and the predicted signal coefÞcient
is likely due to an error in the measurement of the spatial
frequencyl and/or the fabrication of the loop with frequency
4421
l. A slight difference between the actual frequencies of
the magnetic sheet and the loop may result in a very
large reduction in ßux through the wire loop because of
the alternating nature of the magnetic Þeld, resulting in
destructive interference. Additionally, the amplitude of the
magnetic Þeld may not have been constant along the surface
of the magnet, and the sensor may not have stayed level with
the surface of the magnet. Further work may involve building
an accelerometer changing amplitude as well as frequency to
accurately determine acceleration. Making the entire sensor
smaller would allow for easier integration and use in self-
folding machines, but this would require a stronger magnetic
Þeld and/or more precise fabrication methods.
The contact switch self-folded and successfully performed
its function of turning a circuit on and off. Its design allows
for easy integration into the design and fold patterns for
more complex machines that may require bi-stable switches,
actuators, or valves. However, there are geometric constraints
such as a minimum width of the links in order provide
sufÞcient torque from the SMP to actuate self-folding of
such devices. Each self-folding hinge must be approximately
10 mm long or folding will not occur, limiting the total
minimum size of the mechanism.
The self-assembling lamp demonstrates the potential for
the rapid and inexpensive production of self-folding ma-
chines that can interact with the environment. It showed
that even complex mechanisms, such as the mechanical
switch, can be integrated into the self-folding process of a
larger machine, and utilized in practical electronic circuits.
Although printable sensors may lack the robust structural
strength and reliability of other sensors, they have many
potential applications such as low-cost rapid prototyping and
manufacturing of customized designs in residential homes.
The development of sensors that utilize self-folding manu-
facturing techniques and their integration into more complex
structures is an important stepping stone in the path towards
autonomously assembling machines and robots.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors gratefully acknowledge support from the
National Science Foundation (award numbers CCF-1138967
and EFRI-1240383). Any opinions, Þndings and conclusions
or recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reßect those of the
National Science Foundation.
REFERENCES
[1] E. D. Demaine, M. L. Demaine, and J. S. B. Mitchell, ÒFolding
ßat silhouettes and wrapping polyhedral packages: New results in
computational origami,Ó Computational Geometry, vol. 16, no. 1, pp.
3Ð21, 2000.
[2] E. D. Demaine and M. L. Demaine, ÒRecent results in computational
origami,Ó in Proceedings of the 3rd International Meeting of Origami
Science, Math, and Education. Citeseer, 2001, pp. 3Ð16.
[3] H. Okuzaki, T. Saido, H. Suzuki, Y . Hara, and H. Yan, ÒA biomorphic
origami actuator fabricated by folding a conducting paper,Ó in Journal
of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 127. IOP Publishing, 2008, p.
012001.
[4] C. C. Min and H. Suzuki, ÒGeometrical properties of paper spring,Ó
in Manufacturing Systems and Technologies for the New Frontier.
Springer, 2008, pp. 159Ð162.
[5] E. Hawkes, B. An, N. M. Benbernou, H. Tanaka, S. Kim, E. D.
Demaine, D. Rus, and R. J. Wood, ÒProgrammable matter by folding,Ó
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 107, no. 28, p.
12441, 2010.
[6] X. Liu, M. Mwangi, X. Li, M. OÕBrien, and G. M. Whitesides, ÒPaper-
based piezoresistive MEMS sensors,Ó Lab on a Chip, vol. 11, no. 13,
pp. 2189Ð2196, 2011.
[7] C. D. Onal, R. J. Wood, and D. Rus, ÒTowards printable robotics:
Origami-inspired planar fabrication of three-dimensional mecha-
nisms,Ó inIEEEInt.Conf.onRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,
2011, pp. 4608Ð4613.
[8] C. D. Onal, R. J. Wood, and D. Rus, ÒAn origami-inspired approach
to worm robots,Ó IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 18,
no. 2, pp. 430Ð438, 2012.
[9] P. S. Sreetharan, J. P. Whitney, M. D. Strauss, and R. J. Wood,
ÒMonolithic fabrication of millimeter-scale machines,Ó Journal of
Micromechanics and Microengineering, vol. 22, no. 5, p. 055027,
2012.
[10] J. P. Whitney, P. S. Sreetharan, K. Y . Ma, and R. J. Wood, ÒPop-
up book MEMS,Ó Journal of Micromechanics and Microengineering,
vol. 21, no. 11, p. 115021, 2011.
[11] H. Lipson and J. B. Pollack, ÒAutomatic design and manufacture of
robotic lifeforms,Ó Nature, vol. 406, no. 6799, pp. 974Ð978, 2000.
[12] K. Miura, ÒMethod of packaging and deployment of large membranes
in space,Ó in 31st Congress of the International Astronautical Feder-
ation, 1980.
[13] R. Konings and R. Thijs, ÒFoldable containers: a new perspective on
reducing container-repositioning costs,Ó European Journal of Trans-
port and Infrastructure Research, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 333Ð352, 2001.
[14] S. M. Felton, M. T. Tolley, C. D. Onal, D. Rus, and R. J. Wood,
ÒRobot self-assembly by folding: a printed inchworm robot,Ó in IEEE
Int. Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE, 2013, pp.
277Ð282.
[15] S. M. Felton, M. T. Tolley, B. Shin, C. D. Onal, E. D. Demaine, D. Rus,
and R. J. Wood, ÒSelf-folding with shape memory composites,Ó Soft
Matter, 2013.
[16] M. T. Tolley, S. M. Felton, S. Miyashita, L. Xu, B. Shin, M. Zhou,
D. Rus, and R. J. Wood, ÒSelf-folding shape memory laminates for
automated fabrication,Ó in IEEE Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2013, pp. 4931Ð4936.
[17] Y . Liu, J. K. Boyles, J. Genzer, and M. D. Dickey, ÒSelf-folding of
polymer sheets using local light absorption,Ó Soft Matter, vol. 8, pp.
1764Ð1769, 2012.
[18] T. Ichimaru, ÒLatch with switch,Ó Feb. 21 2006, US Patent 7,002,092.
[19] K. Naoki, H. Shoji, and T. Sadao, ÒPush button switch,Ó July 5 1988,
US Patent 4,755,645.
[20] S. P. Johnston, ÒMercury switch,Ó Feb. 25 1986, US Patent 4,572,934.
[21] R. J. Pluta and C. M. A. Ko, ÒForce sensor,Ó Oct. 8 1996, US Patent
5,563,355.
[22] K. Ziegler, ÒCapacitive force sensor,Ó Sept. 5 1995, US Patent
5,447,076.
[23] B. M. Finio, K. C. Galloway, and R. J. Wood, ÒAn ultra-high precision,
high bandwidth torque sensor for microrobotics applications,Ó in
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 31Ð38.
[24] J. Kramer, R. Sarpeshkar, and C. Koch, ÒAn analog VLSI velocity
sensor,Ó in Circuits and Systems, 1995. ISCASÕ95., 1995 IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on, vol. 1. IEEE, 1995, pp. 413Ð416.
[25] L. L. Howell, Compliant mechanisms. Wiley-Interscience, 2001.
[26] B. D. Jensen, L. L. Howell, and G. M. Roach, ÒBistable compliant
mechanism,Ó Apr. 10 2001, US Patent 6,215,081.
4422
