Limits to Compliance and the Role of Tactile Sensing in Grasping
Leif P. Jentoft Student Member, IEEE, Qian Wan Student Member, IEEE, Robert D. Howe Fellow, IEEE
Abstract— Grasping and manipulation in unstructured en-
vironments must handle a wide range of object properties
and signiﬁcant sensing errors. Underactuation and compliance
have been shown to be an effective way to improve grasp-
ing performance under such uncertainty, but the degree of
compliance plays an important role in both gently adapting to
sensing errors and maintaining stable grasps of heavy objects.
These demands limit the range of objects that can be grasped.
We consider the role and required characteristics of tactile
sensing as a compensation method when compliance alone is
insufﬁcient. By strategic use of contact sensing, it is possible to
expand the capabilities of a hand to grasp effectively under a
wide range of positioning errors using simple position-driven
motors and low-cost hardware.
I. INTRODUCTION
Grasping in unstructured environments promises to enable
a wide range of important real-world applications, including
aiding disaster response, performing household chores, and
assisting the elderly and inﬁrm. There has been considerable
progress towards this goal of late, particularly using under-
actuated hands [1], [2], [4]. These end effectors are simpler
than anthropomorphic hands, more capable than parallel
jaw grippers, and aim for good performance at moderate
cost. “Underactuated” implies the use of fewer motors than
degrees of freedom (DOF), but the key feature is that the
unactuated DOF are coupled so that the hand mechanism
adapts to object geometry and task constraints using pas-
sive mechanics rather than active control [5], as required
with high-DOF anthropomorphic hands [6]–[8]. In many
underactuated hands, the unactuated DOF are constrained by
compliance such as that imparted by ﬂexure joints [2], [4].
During grasping, the deﬂection of these compliant joints is
determined by the contact constraints, actuator motions, and
joint stiffness.
Hands using this approach have demonstrated good ability
to grasp unknown objects despite the sensing errors inherent
in unstructured environments. Designs of such hands have
been based on intuition, kinematic optimization [9], [10],
and task analysis [4]. There has, however, been a limited
understanding of the role of compliance in real grasping
tasks using multiﬁngered hands, including its relationship
to object and task properties. Such an understanding maybe
expected to improve hand design and enable the creation of
more effective grasping controllers.
In this paper we examine the limitations of compliance as
a means to enable effective grasping of the diverse objects
All authors are with the School of Engineering and Applied Science,
Harvard University, 02138 USA e-mail: ljentoft@seas.harvard.edu
L. Jentoft is also with TakkTile, LLC, Cambridge, MA 02138
Manuscript received Sept 16, 2013
Fig. 1. Compliant underactuation allows hands to passively adapt to
variations in object geometry and position to provide stable grasps (a).
However, grasping too hard can cause undesirable joint motion and eject
the object (b). Registering control actions against the object surface with
tactile contact sensing results in better grasps using simple hardware (c).
encountered in unstructured environments. In general, when
any coupled joints are not constrained by the geometry of
the grasped object (for example, during ﬁngertip grasps),
compliance must be set to accommodate the heaviest objects
(or highest forces) that will be encountered in order to
maintain stable control of the position of the object. This
means that for lighter objects, the beneﬁts of compliance
(i.e. low forces in response to sensing and control errors) are
obviated, and target objects may be dislodged or damaged
in the grasp acquisition process.
We then consider the role and required characteristics of
tactile sensing as a compensation method when compliance
does not help. In this situation, simple methods are effective,
particularly using the point of contact with objects as a
reference point for subsequent compliant motion. This is
compatible with low-cost, simple hardware and results in
better compensation for positioning errors.
In this paper, we present an analysis of the limits of
ﬁngertip compliance to both maintain ﬁrm grasps and gently
compensate for positioning errors, followed by an approach
to use tactile sensing to compensate for these limitations
using contact-relative motion. Experiments are presented that
demonstrate the advantages of contact-relative motion to
improve the tolerated positioning error and reduce grasp
force. Finally, these results are analyzed in the context of
the goal to create low-cost hands that function reliably in
real-world settings.
II. GRASP CONTROL
A grasp control system maps information about a target
object to actuator commands that result in a stable grasp.
There is no deﬁnitive architecture for such control, and
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 6394
boundaries between perception, grasp planning, and grasp
execution are mingled in the literature to various degrees
depending on the goal. We are concerned with the near-term
development of systems that can reliably grasp objects in
real-world setting using inexpensive, low-complexity hard-
ware. In this context, the primary challenge is overcoming
large variability and uncertainty in object properties (geom-
etry, pose, mass, etc.); sensing limitations (noise, occlusions,
etc.); and robot behavior (friction, backlash, etc.).
To do so, simplicity and error-tolerance are important –
motors are a major cost and complexity driver so fewer are
better, acquiring extensive information about a target object
in unstructured clutter is expensive, and adapting parameter-
sensitive controllers to match a wide range of objects is time-
consuming.
A. Limits to Compliance
The limitations on the useful range of compliance can be
illustrated with a simpliﬁed model of the grasping process
that shows the factors which determine performance for both
the heaviest and lightest objects to be grasped. Figure 2
shows the hand idealized as a pair of ﬁngers grasping heavy
and light objects, with equivalent lateral ﬁnger tip stiffnessk.
For the heaviest anticipated object, with mass m
max
, ﬁnger
stiffness must be set high enough to limit unintended motion
of the ﬁngers and object during manipulation. One force
that will be encountered in many tasks is gravity, so the
object weight m
max
g can be applied in various directions
during translation and rotation of the hand. The resulting
displacement of the object within the hand is then
x
max
=
m
max
g
2k
(1)
In the design process, the stiffness could be set using this
relationship based on the maximum displacement that can be
tolerated for the heaviest anticipated object.
For the lightest object with mass m
min
, the performance
limit for the grasping task occurs if one ﬁnger makes contact
with the object before the other. Continued closing of the
ﬁnger then compresses the ﬁnger tip spring and applies an
unbalanced force on the object. This can make the object
slide out of the graspable range or cause it to fall. If the
distance between the opposite side of the object and the
other ﬁnger is x
min
, then the force developed before the
second ﬁnger makes contact and applies a stabilizing force
is kx
min
. Using a simple Coulomb friction model with
coefﬁcient of friction, this will cause sliding if the applied
force is
m
min
g =kx
min
(2)
We can calculate a mass dynamic range by looking at the
ratio of the masses for these limiting cases
m
max
m
min
=
2x
max
x
min
(3)
The hand system might be expected to successfully grasp
and move objects whose mass falls within this range. For
Hand
Light
Object
Fingertip
Sti?ness
K
?X
Sensing 
Error
?X
Object 
Droop
Hand
Heavy
Object
Fig. 2. Compliant underactuation allows a hand to compensate for
positioning errors while exerting low forces. However, compliance is also
responsible for maintaining the stability of heavier objects. This limits the
range of objects that can be grasped.
real systems, however, this range is limited. The maximum
displacements that might be tolerated during transport of
heavy objects are at most 1-2 cm, in order to avoid shifts
in position that can cause twisting or sliding of the object
within the ﬁngers. For light objects, vision and range sensor
systems cannot be expected to localize object surfaces to
better than several mm accuracy. The coefﬁcient of friction
is often between 0.2 and 0.5 for many common objects.
The overall the mass dynamic range is thus roughly an
order of magnitude in size. While several measures can help
increase this range (e.g. power grasp conﬁguration, “caging”
to prevent light objects from falling, etc.), useful hands need
to grasp objects that span about three orders of magnitude
in mass, from a few grams (e.g. a pencil) to a kilogram (a
one liter bottle) or more. This suggests that a ﬁxed ﬁnger
stiffness is inadequate for the entire range.
B. Contact-Relative Motion
An alternative to passive compliance is to augment the
system with active sensing and control at low force levels.
This allows the generalization of of grasp control across
variations such as positioning error [11], and support surface
and object height [12]. Directly closing the loop around
sensor readings creates a number of challenges for low-cost
hardware however. Measuring low forces through intrinsic
sensing (e.g. cable tension, motor torque) requires a clean
transmission with little backlash or friction that is costly
to build. Strain gauges are likewise expensive and usually
fragile. On the other hand, surface sensors such as tactile
arrays have deadzones in areas such as joints; if a contact
starts moving towards a deadzone, the reduced readings may
cause the controller to push the object farther into it (a
phenomena we have observed in our experiments). In both
cases, achieving sufﬁcient controller bandwidth to ensure
stability can also be challenging.
Using sensors to detect discrete events such as contact, on
the other hand, does not require high accuracy to maintain
position or force. Guarded moves have been used to com-
pensate for errors in perception and positioning, e.g. [13],
[14].
The contact-relative control method presented here works
as follows: the hand is positioned over an object and the
6395
4 Motors
Position-Controlled
Compliant Coupled Joints
Block Fixes
 DOF
Flexure
Joint
Pin
Joint
T endon
Sti? Finger Joint
Pin
Joint
T endon
Kinematic 
Model
Kinematic 
Model
T actile Sensors
No Joint-Angle 
Sensors
Contact Sensing
Fig. 3. Experimental conditions. In the control group (top), each ﬁnger is
restricted to a single DOF by inserting a stiff plastic block over the ﬂexure
joint. In the compliant experimental group (middle), the distal ﬂexure forms
a coupled, spring-loaded linkage with the proximal pin joint through the
tendon as shown. In the sensorized experimental group (bottom), nine tactile
sensors are used to measure contact relative to tendon position.
ﬁngers are closed around the expected object position. Each
ﬁnger moves independently, stopping when it contacts an
object. Once all ﬁngers are in contact or have moved beyond
the other ﬁngers by a maximum threshold, the tendons are
tightened by a ﬁxed amount sufﬁcient to grasp typical objects
securely. The compliant underactuated joints of the hand then
control and balance the internal forces and compensate for
variations in object geometry. By referencing the motion of
the actuators to the surface of the object, excessive force that
might cause the links to eject the object are avoided.
Note this takes advantage of two additional observations.
First, by indexing directly from the actuator position, the
controller does not require accurate proprioceptive sensing,
e.g. sensing of ﬁnger joint angles and a kinematic model
of the hand. Second, because the motion of the ﬁnger is
driven by only a single motor, the impact of messy mechanics
such backlash and and friction can be sidestepped completely
provided the direction of motion remains consistent.
This registration creates a larger “region of attraction”
within which an object will be successfully grasped.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Materials and Methods
It is challenging to characterize performance in unstruc-
tured environments, because they inherently include great
variability in objects, tasks, and environment properties. We
have devoted extensive experimental effort to examining
the grasping behavior of one such end effector, the i-HY
Hand [4]. This is a compliant, underactuated hand with
three ﬁngers developed in collaboration between Harvard
University, iRobot, and Yale University with the goal of
performing tasks robustly under unstructured conditions. The
Fig. 4. Experiments were performed with a hand based on the i-HY
hand [4]. It is driven by four position-controlled servos running three
compliant underactuated ﬁngers and one preshaping DOF. A Kinect Camera
measures object centroid and major axis, a Baxter robot places the hand.
present study uses a 3D printed version with 4 motors as
shown in Fig. 4. Each ﬁnger has a proximal pin joint and a
distal ﬂexure joint, with a single tendon spanning past both
as shown in Fig. 3. Previous work has shown that iHY hand
is capable of grasping a large range of objects. The ﬁngers
and palm are embedded with strips of tactile sensors [15]
(TakkTile LLC, Cambridge, MA) for contact detection. The
contact threshold is set to approximately 40mN. The motors
(Dynamixel RX-28, Robotis, South Korea) are driven by a
torque-limited proportional-derivative position control loop.
The hand is mounted on a 7dof arm on a Baxter Robot
(Rethink Robotics, Boston, MA). The motors in Baxter’s
arms are serial elastic motors, which allows Baxter to be
inherently compliant; at the current version of the control
code, this also results in positioning errors of several cm
under load (especially in the z-direction). Localizing the
objects is accomplished by an overhead Kinect camera. A
2D image is acquired, and the major axis and centroid of the
object is determined by segmenting the object with a binary
threshold and ﬁtting an ellipse to this contour. The Z-height
of the object position is set separately for a each object. To
evaluate the methods proposed, we performed the following
series of experiments to show the advantage and limits of
compliance and contact-relative motion on this hardware.
The objects chosen are typical, selected to show behavior
we have observed in many manipulation experiments.
B. Experiment 1 - Compliance
The ﬁrst experiment compares hands with stiff and com-
pliant ﬁngers in handling large heavy objects, such as a bottle
ﬁlled with water (mass approximately 1.5kg). Geometric
variation is introduced to the grasp by rotating the hand away
from the ideal grasping axis. The best grasp aligns the hand
and water bottle axes so that the ﬁngers wrap around the
body of the bottle in the center, so that the weight of the
bottle can be symmetrically distribution in the hand. To test
the robustness of this grasp to positioning errors, the hand
was rotated in 30 degrees increments around the vertical axis
and 3 rounds of open-loop power grasps were executed using
6396
both the compliant ﬁngers with ﬂexure joints, and stiff ﬁngers
where the compliance is removed by the addition of rigid
block across the distal join as shown in Fig. 3.
C. Experiment 2 - Light Object
In the second experiment, the effects of compliance and
sensing on a light object were studied. The light object (a roll
of masking tape, part number 76265A11, McMaster-Carr,
Newark, NJ) is grasped under three conditions: no contact
sensing with stiff ﬁngers, no contact sensing with compliant
ﬁngers, and compliant ﬁngers with contact sensing.
To test adaptation to variations in geometry, we tested
against a range of position errors, systematically offsetting
the hand position from the actual object location in 2cm
increments in both x and y direction until the edges of the
graspable region were discovered. In the control group of no
sensing and no compliance, compliance is again removed by
adding a block across the distal joint as shown in Fig. 3 to
prevent it bending. In the ﬁrst experimental group the distal
joint is left compliant to adapt to object shape. In the second
experimental group, the following contact-referenced control
is used: each ﬁnger closes independently until contact is
detected (or a tendon travel limit beyond ﬁngers in contact is
exceeded). Then all ﬁngers are tightened by 4mm additional
tendon travel (set to exert sufﬁcient force to grasp typical
objects).
D. Experiment 3 - Controlling Gentle Contacts
To demonstrate the effect of blind spots on the ability to
compensate for position offset, several different controllers
were tested as follows. The hand was mounted on a linear
stage and and commanded to close on a cylinder (diameter
107mm) mounted on a force-torque sensor. The disturbance
forces measured during this process were compared for com-
pliant ﬁngers driven directly by servomotors (controlled with
a torque-limited proportional-derivative controller), compli-
ant ﬁngers with a closed loop control loop wrapped around
the contact forces measured by the tactile sensors (in this
case a simple hysteresis controller), and compliant ﬁngers
driven with a contact-relative controller tuned to match the
force applied by the closed-loop controller.
E. Results
The results of these experiments show that both com-
pliance and contact-relative motion improve performance
under positioning errors, but that these beneﬁts occur under
different domains. For the water bottle, the ideal grasp for the
bottle is placing the ﬁngers at the 3 and 9 o’clock positions
because the ﬁngers are symmetrically distributed over the
object balancing the force exerted. However, this is disturbed
as the grasp is rotated around the vertical axis. Compliance
improved the ability of a cylindrical power grasp primitive
to compensate for variation in object orientation around the
z-axis. In the control case with stiff ﬁngers, the grasp was
able to handle only
+
 
30
o
of orientation error, wheras with
compliance the grasp was able to handle all orientations
except for one that placed the thumb directly over the bottle
Fig. 5. Compliance helps considerably when grasping larger, heavier
objects due to the creation of multiple contacts that can better resist
gravitational loads. A water bottle was grasped at 30
o
increments around
the vertical axis with stiff ﬁngers (top) and compliant ﬁngers (bottom).
x
y
Sti Open Loop Control Contact Relative Control
Compliant Open Loop Control
x osets
y osets
Fig. 6. For small objects, contact-relative control is better at compensating
for position alignment than compliance alone, which actually performs
worse than stiff ﬁngers.
neck (the hand is not large enough in its span the reach the
whole bottle lengthwise).
In the second set of experiments, the lighter roll of tape
was grasped with a spherical ﬁngertip grasp. In the control
group, an open loop grasp with stiff ﬁngers functioned well
because the light object does not need multiple contacts
from compliant ﬁngers to resist gravitational loads, and when
sufﬁciently aligned, caging [16] served to align the object.
At larger offsets, however, the ﬁngers pushed the object
out of the way before a good grasp could be achieved as
shown in Fig. 7. The disconnected region of success on
the lower right is caused by the geometry of the object,
which allows both an external grasp and an edge pinch.
This region is asymmetric due to minor variations in the
tendon length between the two ﬁngers, which caused small
6397
Successful Grasps
(a) (b) (c)
(d)
Contact Sensing Minimizes Object Disturbance
Open-loop Controlled Fingers Eject Object
pushes 
away
nger 
stops
failure
success
(a)
(b) (c)
(a)
B.
A.
C.
(b)
(c)
(e) (d)
Fig. 7. Various successful grasps (top row), and typical error modes.
Unconstrained compliant joints deﬂect and allow the object to be ejected
(row 4, move to row 2). Stiff ﬁngers push an offset object out of the way
(row 3). Contact-referenced control results in a stable grasp under the same
offset (row 2).
position differences that resulted in large force differences
from the stiff ﬁngers. The ﬁrst experimental group shows that
compliance alone was unable to compensate for positioning
errors. In this case, the ﬁngers are comparatively stiff with
respect to the object mass, and tend to move the object before
deﬂecting. Subsequent deformation of the ﬂexures during the
remainder of the grasp actually tended to eject the object.
The second experimental group tested contact-referenced
control with compliance. The admissible offset in the primary
grasp was larger than both open loop cases because the
ﬁngers stopped against the object rather than pushing it
way. Moreover, although all grasps in this experiment were
counted as “successful” for consistency if they withstood 3
seconds of shaking without dropping the object, some grasps
were superior to others for subsequent operations such as
placing the object as shown in the top row of Fig. 7. For the
contact-reactive control, all grasps fell into modes described
in Fig. 7 (a) or (c). The controller did not capture the region
of edge-pinch grasps because a single ﬁnger contacting the
object would stop and wait for other ﬁngers to arrive, rather
Hand
Force/T orque 
Sensor
Linear Stage
displacement
0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 1
100
200
300
400
500
Disturbance Force
O?set (cm)
Open Loop
Closed Loop 
Pressure
Contact-Relative 
Fig. 8. Control comparison. A large cylinder was mounted on a force-torque
sensor and grasped under a range of offsets to compare different controllers.
For the same pad contact forces, contact-referenced control resulted in lower
forces on the object due to better handling of blind spots and low-bandwidth
control loops.
than pulling it towards the center as in the open loop stiff-
ﬁnger case. This capability could be added programatically
if desired, but the grasps that resulted from this edge case
were generally the pathological successes (b) and (d).
The third experiment showed that comparing to open-loop
power grasps, both closed-loop force control and contact-
referenced control signiﬁcantly reduce the disturbance force
applied to the object. However, contact-referenced control
exerts an even smaller force than force feedback control
strategy.
IV. DISCUSSION
Robot hands are frequently designed intuitively, or for
speciﬁc tasks, or by optimization of kinematics for a spe-
ciﬁc metric. Unfortunately, the mechanics of grasping is
extremely complex, with highly nonlinear contacts at the
ends of multiple serial kinematic chain ﬁngers in parallel.
This makes it difﬁcult to effectively calculate or control
contact forces. Recently, reduced-complexity underactuated
hands have demonstrated good performance. There is an
urgent need to explain this success, to enhance hand control,
improve hand designs, and develop simple, inexpensive,
and robust hands that enable real-world applications. This
study aims to understand how compliance and simple tactile
sensing contribute to grasping by underactuated hands by
minimizing complexity and maximizing performance.
Compliance keeps forces low despite the wide object
variability and uncertain sensing inherent in unstructured en-
vironments [17]. This is demonstrated in the ﬁrst experiments
where grasping a heavy water bottle resulted in low success
rates with stiff ﬁngers, but good grasping with compliant
ﬁngers. Hand stiffness values, however, must be speciﬁed
to accommodate objects at the high end of the anticipated
range of forces and object weights to enable good control
of the object after it is grasped. This makes compliance less
effective at low forces and with light objects, because the
forces generated by positioning errors can dislodge objects
before the ﬁngers deﬂect. This is seen in the second set of
experiments, where contact with one ﬁnger often moved the
object out of grasp range before the other ﬁngers could make
contact.
6398
One potential solution to this dilemma is using a variable
stiffness actuator or structure such as [18]. While a num-
ber of interesting designs for variable impedance actuators
and joints have appeared in the literature, both of these
approaches greatly increase complexity and cost due to
the sensing, motors, and mechanisms required. Use of a
nonlinear stiffening structure avoids these complications, but
it is challenging to deﬁne a ﬁxed set of passive nonlinear
stiffnesses that work across the range of objects and tasks in
unstructured environments.
Tactile Sensing is a promising technology for enhancing
robot grasping – and it has been promising for decades.
While seemingly simple, implementation of effective tactile
sensing has proved challenging. Low and inconsistent sensi-
tivity, limited spatial coverage (“blind spots”), low durability,
and difﬁculty in integrating sensors into the ﬁnger surface are
some of the many problems encountered, and contact signals
are inherently noisy due to the complex interaction dynamics
of the hand and object. These issues makes real-world use
of many tactile signal processing approaches in the literature
problematic at present. As a result, grasp controllers that
make simple use of tactile sensing are more likely to achieve
satisfactory performance in real applications.
Contact-referenced control combines the strengths of
both approaches, using low-threshold contact sensing to
compensate for positioning errors, but using compliance
to control and balance the internal forces on the object.
This allows the use of simple position-controlled actuators,
limited-bandwidth control loops (50Hz in this case), and
results in gentler grasps under larger positioning errors.
Such reductions in system cost drivers are an important step
towards enabling better robot participation in solving real-
world tasks.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This study addresses the problem of creating low cost and
reliable grasping systems for unstructured environments. At-
taining good performance for a wide range of object sizes and
weights can be achieved with a combination of passive com-
pliance tuned for heavy objects and tactile sensing to min-
imize disturbances for light objects. This approach requires
only simple contact detection and localization from tactile
sensing, which is consistent with the current state of this
technology. In addition to enabling real-world applications,
the methods advocated here can create working grasping
testbeds, which permits incremental progress towards more
sophisticated systems that use advanced sensing and control
methods and more elaborate and capable hand mechanisms.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the National Science Foun-
dation under award number IIS-0905180, by the Defense
Advanced Research Projects Agency under contract number
W91CRB-10-C-0141.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Lalibert´ e and C. M. Gosselin, “Underactuation in space robotic
hands,” Proceedings of Sixth ISAIRAS: A New Space Odyssey, Mon-
treal, Canada, 2001.
[2] A. Dollar and R. Howe, “Simple, robust autonomous grasping in
unstructured environments,” in 2007 IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and
Automation (ICRA2007), 2007, pp. 4693 –4700.
[3] F. Lotti, P. Tiezzi, G. Vassura, L. Biagiotti, and C. Melchiorri, “Ubh
3: an anthropomorphic hand with simpliﬁed endo-skeletal structure
and soft continuous ﬁngerpads,” in Robotics and Automation, 2004.
Proceedings. ICRA ’04. 2004 IEEE International Conference on,
vol. 5, 2004, pp. 4736–4741 V ol.5.
[4] L. Odhner, L. P. Jentoft, M. R. Claffee, N. Corson, Y . Tenzer, R. R.
Ma, M. Buehler, R. Kohout, R. D. Howe, and A. M. Dollar, “A
compliant, underactuated hand for robust manipulation,” IJRR (under
review, available anonymously at http://arxiv.org/abs/1301.4394), vol.
abs/1301.4394, 2013.
[5] S. Hirose and Y . Umetani, “The depment of soft gripper for the
versatile robot hand,” Mechanism and Machine Theory, pp. 351–359,
1978.
[6] R. Mahmoud, A. Ueno, and S. Tatsumi, “An assistive tele-operated
anthropomorphic robot hand: Osaka city university hand ii,” in
Human-Robot Interaction (HRI), 2011 6th ACM/IEEE International
Conference on, 2011, pp. 85–92.
[7] H. Kawasaki, T. Komatsu, K. Uchiyama, and T. Kurimoto, “Dexterous
anthropomorphic robot hand with distributed tactile sensor: Gifu
hand ii,” in Systems, Man, and Cybernetics, 1999. IEEE SMC ’99
Conference Proceedings. 1999 IEEE International Conference on,
vol. 2, 1999, pp. 782–787 vol.2.
[8] J. Butterfass, M. Grebenstein, H. Liu, and G. Hirzinger, “Dlr-hand ii:
next generation of a dextrous robot hand,” inRoboticsandAutomation,
2001. Proceedings 2001 ICRA. IEEE International Conference on,
vol. 1, 2001, pp. 109–114 vol.1.
[9] F. Hammond, J. Weisz, A. de la Llera Kurth, P. K. Allen, and
R. Howe, “Towards a design optimization method for reducing the
mechanical complexity of underactuated robotic hands,” in Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2012 IEEE International Conference on,
2012, pp. 2843–2850.
[10] M. Ciocarlie and P. Allen, “Data-driven optimization for underactuated
robotic hands,” in Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2010 IEEE
International Conference on, 2010, pp. 1292–1299.
[11] F. Stulp, E. Theodorou, M. Kalakrishnan, P. Pastor, L. Righetti, and
S. Schaal, “Learning motion primitive goals for robust manipulation,”
in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2011 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on, 2011, pp. 325–331.
[12] M. Kazemi, J. sebastien Valois, J. A. Bagnell, and N. Pollard,
“Robust object grasping using force compliant motion primitives,” in
In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2012.
[13] K. Hsiao, S. Chitta, M. Ciocarlie, and E. Jones, “Contact-reactive
grasping of objects with partial shape information,” in Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), 2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on, 2010, pp. 1228–1235.
[14] A. Dollar, L. Jentoft, J. Gao, and R. Howe, “Contact sensing and grasp-
ing performance of compliant hands,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 28, pp.
65–75, 2010.
[15] Y . Tenzer, L. P. Jentoft, and R. D. Howe, “Inexpensive and
easily customized tactile array sensors using mems barometers
chips,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Magazine (Under Review,
http://biorobotics.harvard.edu/pubs/2012/Tenzer2012.pdf), 2012.
[16] M. Dogar and S. Srinivasa, “Push-grasping with dexterous hands:
Mechanics and a method,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2010 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2010, pp. 2123–2130.
[17] A. M. Dollar and R. D. Howe, “The highly adaptive sdm hand:
Design and performance evaluation,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 585–597, 2010. [Online].
Available: http://ijr.sagepub.com/content/29/5/585.abstract
[18] B. Vanderborght, A. Albu-Schaffer, A. Bicchi, E. Burdet, D. Caldwell,
R. Carloni, M. Catalano, G. Ganesh, M. Garabini, M. Grebenstein,
G. Grioli, S. Haddadin, A. Jafari, M. Laffranchi, D. Lefeber, F. Petit,
S. Stramigioli, N. Tsagarakis, M. Van Damme, R. Van Ham, L. C.
Visser, and S. Wolf, “Variable impedance actuators: Moving the
robots of tomorrow,” in Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on, 2012, pp. 5454–5455.
6399
