  
? 
EXTENDED ABSTRACT 
We present a novel dynamic gait to control in-plane 
locomotion ? [1] (forward, back, clockwise and counter 
clockwise rotations) of a compliant legged hexapedal 
robot using a single actuator. The gait exploits the 
compliance disparity between alternate stance tripods, 
to generate rotation by controlling the acceleration of 
the robot ? [2]. The direction of turning depends on the 
configuration of the legs -tripod left or right- and the 
direction of the acceleration. Alternating acceleration 
in successive steps allows for continuous rotation in 
the desired direction. A simplified model of a robot is 
made and a numerical simulation was performed to 
analyze the behavior and optimize robot parameters. 
The robot is capable of rotating with a coefficient of 
friction as low as 0.2 but its performance improves as 
the COF increases up to 0.6. Beyond that, little change 
is noticed.  
  
Figure 1.The Experimental robot 1STAR 
The locomotion gait is proven experimentally using a 
purpose-built experimental robot actuated by a single 
motor (Figures 1 and 2). The robot is capable of 
crawling straight or turning in either direction as 
commanded (Figure 3). The experimental robot 
supplied physical validation of the single actuator 
concept. The robot achieved an alternating longitudinal 
acceleration with an amplitude of roughly 0.4g, which, 
together with proper phasing of the legs, allowed the 
robot to turn in either direction based on the tripod 
configuration. The turning radius is roughly 0.5m, at a 
speed of roughly 0.3m/s, and the robot can switch the 
 
 
1
 Department of ME, Ben Gurion University, (zadavid@post.bgu.ac.il) 
2
 Department of EECS, UC Berkeley, (Ronf@eecs.berkeley.edu) 
direction of turning by changing the phase of the legs. 
The energy consumption of the alternating velocity gait 
required slightly more energy (22%) in comparison to 
straight locomotion. 
The VICON experimental results in figure 3 show the 
robot performing a slalom (a) and obstacle avoidance 
maneuvers (b) which include going straight and turning 
either direction, while Figure 3 C shows the robot 
making a full circle in one direction and another in the 
opposite direction. 
 
Figure 2. Robot Model. The center legs are compliant while the front and 
back legs are rigid. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The path of the robot from the VICON.  
[1] D. Zarrouk, A. Pullin, N.J. Kohut, R.S. Fearing, "Sprawl 
tuned?autonomous?robot”,?IEEE?International?Conference?on?
Robotics and Automation 2013. 
[2] D. Zarrouk, R.S. Fearing, "Compliance-based dynamic 
steering? for? hexapods”,? IEEE? International? Conference? on?
Intelligent Robots and Systems, pp. 3093-3098, 2012. 
 
 
1STAR, A One-Actuator STeerAble Robot 
David Zarrouk
1
 and Ronald S. Fearing
2
 
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 2569
