A Soft Wearable Robotic Device for Active Knee Motions using Flat
Pneumatic Artiﬁcial Muscles
Yong-Lae Park
1
, Jobim Santos
2
, Kevin G. Galloway
2
, Eugene C. Goldﬁeld
2;3
, and Robert J. Wood
2;4
Abstract— We present the design of a soft wearable robotic
device composed of elastomeric artiﬁcial muscle actuators and
soft fabric sleeves, for active assistance of knee motions. A
key feature of the device is the two-dimensional design of
the elastomer muscles that not only allows the compactness
of the device, but also signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the manufactur-
ing process. In addition, the fabric sleeves make the device
lightweight and easily wearable. The elastomer muscles were
characterized and demonstrated an initial contraction force
of 38N and maximum contraction of 18mm with 104kPa
input pressure, approximately. Four elastomer muscles were
employed for assisted knee extension and ﬂexion. The robotic
device was tested on a 3D printed leg model with an articulated
knee joint. Experiments were conducted to examine the relation
between systematic change in air pressure and knee extension-
ﬂexion. The results showed maximum extension and ﬂexion
angles of 95

and 37

, respectively. However, these angles are
highly dependent on underlying leg mechanics and positions.
The device was also able to generate maximum extension and
ﬂexion forces of 3.5N and 7N, respectively.
I. INTRODUCTION
Wearable robotic devices have increasingly gone beyond
being laboratory curiosities to become an important tool
for clinicians. A dominant design that has emerged from
the laboratory is the exoskeleton with rigid frame struc-
tures [1]. Exoskeletons are often combined with high-torque
electromechanical actuators for military applications [2], [3].
They are also considered as rehabilitation and/or assistive
devices by employing lightweight, compliant (or elastic)
actuators [4], [5], [6].
While there are certain advantages that are derived from
traditional exoskeleton design, such as relatively transparent
force transmission and rigid mechanical body supports, they
also carry several practical limitations, including bulkiness,
mechanical constraints to host bodies, and safety issues
when the wearers physically interact with other people. A
*This work was supported by the Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired
Engineering and National Science Foundation (NSF) grant CNS 0932015.
Any opinions, ﬁgures, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in
this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reﬂect the
views of the NSF.
1
Yong-Lae Park is with the Robotics Institute and the School of Computer
Science, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA (E-mail:
ylpark@cs.cmu.edu).
2
Jobim Santos, Kevin G. Galloway, Eugene C. Goldﬁeld, and
Robert J. Wood are with the Wyss Institute for Biologically In-
spired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, USA (E-
mails: jobim.santos@wyss.harvard.edu; kevin.galloway@wyss.harvard.edu;
eugene.goldﬁeld@childrens.harvard.edu; rjwood@eecs.harvard.edu).
3
Eugene C. Goldﬁeld is also with the Boston Children’s Hospital, Boston,
MA 02155, USA.
4
Robert J. Wood is also with the School of Engineering and Applied
Sciences (SEAS), Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.
3	  cm	  
(a)	

(b)	

Fig. 1. A Second Skin prototype in action. (a) Active knee extension. (b)
Active knee ﬂexion.
new design, soft exoskeletons, overcome such limitations by
removing rigid frame structures and mechanical joints. Such
systems include active soft orthotic devices for assistance of
ankle [7], [8] and knee [9], [10] motions, a compliant exo-
suit for improved metabolic energy efﬁciency through active
gait assistance [11], and upper extremity rehabilitation with
cable-driven [12] and pneumatic muscle [13] actuations. The
design of soft exoskeletons is guided by the biomechanical
properties of the human body so that synthetic components
harness the elastic properties of soft tissue and the me-
chanical advantage of the skeletal levers. However, currently
available actuation mechanisms limit further miniaturization
and weight reduction of the devices, resulting in reduced
wearability.
Therefore, further progress in this emerging ﬁeld will
depend on a new class of soft active materials for mechanical
actuation, and controllable compliance. Devices constructed
from these materials are intended to be worn around wrist
or knee joints and assist in the motor tasks of patients with
neuromuscular injury or with limited motor control. When
active, these devices should be capable of exerting assistive
forces through dramatic but reversible changes in shape
and elastic rigidity. While passive, such devices should not
constrain the natural degrees of freedom of the host joints.
In this paper, we describe the design and characterization
2014 IEEE International Conference on Robotics & Automation (ICRA)
Hong Kong Convention and Exhibition Center
May 31 - June 7, 2014. Hong Kong, China
978-1-4799-3684-7/14/$31.00 ©2014 IEEE 4805
	  
	  
zero-??volume	  air	  chamber	  
Kevlar	  ﬁbers	  
inﬂated	  air	  chamber	  
	  
	  
Kevlar	  ﬁbers	   Air	  chamber	   contrac8on	  
contrac8on	  
(a)	

(b)	

Fig. 2. Comparison of air chamber designs. (a) Conventional air chamber.
(b) Zero-volume air chamber with reduced thickness.
of a soft wearable robotic assistive device (Fig. 1) for rehabil-
itation of injured nervous systems, called the ”Second Skin.”
The device is composed of pneumatic elastomer actuators
and fabric sleeves. A key feature of the device is the two-
dimensional design of the elastomer muscles that not only
allows the compactness of the device, but also signiﬁcantly
simpliﬁes the manufacturing process. In addition, fabric
sleeves make the device easily wearable and lightweight.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: an
overview of the design and the fabrication of the actuator and
the Second Skin device is described in Sec. II; a discussion
of the characterization results is given in Sec. III; current
research challenges and conclusions are discussed in Sec. IV
and Sec. V, respectively.
II. DESIGN
A. Flat Pneumatic Artiﬁcial Muscle Design and Fabrication
We developed a simpliﬁed version of pneumatic artiﬁcial
muscles that has a two-dimensional ﬂat conﬁguration. By
remaining ﬂat in its relaxed state, this version of the muscle
is highly compact, adding little additional volume to host
body when worn as a suit. The ﬂat conﬁguration our muscles
not only provides a compact form factor suitable for a device
worn on the skin surface, but also makes it possible to resize
and reconﬁgure each individual muscle array. Furthermore,
we introduced a new concept of zero-volume air chamber to
further reduce the thickness of the muscles. In conventional
design, such as traditional McKibben muscles [14], straight-
ﬁber embedded rubber muscles [15], and pleated pneumatic
muscles [16], a certain volume of an air chamber must exist
in the structure although it is not actuated. However, our
new concept of zero-volume air chamber completely removes
this useless empty volume and makes the structure compact,
as illustrated in Fig. 2. Furthermore, this 2-D conﬁguration
signiﬁcantly simpliﬁes the manufacturing process. The em-
bedded straight Kevlar ﬁbers
1
(diameter: 350mm), which are
ﬂexible but inextensible, constrain the circumference of the
air chamber and consequently creates horizontal contraction
force and displacement when the air chamber is pressurized.
1
8800K41, McMaster-Carr.
i	   ii	   iii	  
Nega've	  mask	  
iv	   v	   vi	  
Sprayed	  pa1ern	  release	   Top	  mold	  (side	  wall)	  
Pa#ern	  release	  
(a)	

i	   ii	   iii	  
Posi've	  mask	  
vii	   viii	  
Zero-??volume	  air	  chamber	  (unbonded	  area)	  
iv	   v	   vi	  
Uncured	  thin	  elastomer	  layer	  
60°C	  for	  1	  min	  
Spin-??coat	  
(b)	

vii	   viii	  
Zero-??volume	  air	  chamber	  (unbonded	  area)	  
Embedded	  	  
Kevlar	  ﬁbers	  
Fig. 3. (a) Fabrication process for a ﬂat pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle actuator
with a zero-volume air chamber using a negative mask and pattern release
(i: Prepare a bottom mold, ii: Pour liquid elastomer for a bottom layer and
embed Kevlar ﬁbers, iii: Place a negative mask, iv: Spray pattern release,
v: Remove the mask, vi: Place a top mold, vii: Pour liquid elastomer for
a top layer and embed Kevlar ﬁbers, and viii: Remove the top and bottom
molds when the elastomer cures.). (b) Alternative fabrication process to
make a zero-volume air chamber using a positive mask and spin-coating
(i: Prepare a bottom mold, ii: Pour liquid elastomer for a bottom layer,
iii: Place a positive mask, iv: Spin coat liquid elastomer, v: Remove the
mask, vi: Partial bake, vii: Laminate a cured top layer, and viii: Remove
the top and bottom molds when the elastomer layers bond with cure.).
The base material of the air chamber is highly stretchable
silicone rubber
2
Two slightly different fabrication processes for a zero-
volume air chamber are illustrated in Fig. 3. Fig. 3-a uses
pattern release sprayed on the unmasked area to prevent
the bottom layer from becoming bonded to the top layer.
However, Fig. 3-b, as an alternative method, uses a positive
mask placed on the top surface of the cured bottom layer
for preventing liquid elastomer from being coated. The latter
method requires a bonding process of two cured layers while
the former method repeats pouring processes to build a
structure. This process makes a single unit zero-volume air
chamber. By connecting multiple muscle cells in series, a
multi-cell muscle can be made. While a serial conﬁguration
of multiple muscle cells increases the contraction length, a
parallel conﬁguration may increase the contraction force.
Fig. 4 shows an actual prototype of a ﬂat pneumatic
artiﬁcial muscle and its behavior. The size of the muscle
is 80mm x 20mm x 3.5mm, and each muscle includes
four muscle cells (zero-volume air chambers). The size of
each cell is 8mm x 14 mm. This four cell muscle was
employed to build our Second Skin prototype. The weight of
2
Dragon Skin 10, Smooth-On Inc.
4806
air	  source	  
embedded	  	  
Kevlar	  ﬁbers	  
zero-??volume	  	  
air	  chambers	  
thickness:	  3.5	  mm	  
80	  mm	  
(a)	

Pressurized	  
relaxed	  
(b)	

Fig. 4. A complete ﬂat pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle prototype. (a) Four cell
(air chamber) artiﬁcial muscle. (b) Contraction behavior with input pressure.
a single muscle, including tubing and attachment features, is
approximately 8.4g.
B. Second Skin Prototyping
The overall structure of the device is a two-piece stretch-
able fabric sleeve with artiﬁcial muscles part of the outermost
layer. By incorporating an array of the muscles with a form-
ﬁtting sleeve, a wearable assistive device was built, as shown
in Fig. 5. The sleeve was tested on a 3D-printed leg model
with an articulated knee joint (Fig. 5-a). This model was
scaled to approximate a 50
th
percentile 12-month-old infant’s
leg based on [17], [18], since we are aiming to use our
device for infant-toddler rehabilitation. The weights of the
leg model and the sleeves are approximately 388g (thigh:
188g, ower leg: 200g) and 35g (thigh sleeve: 16g, lower
leg sleeve: 19g), respectively. The actuators are connected to
hooks at the ankle, the knee, or the top of the thigh (Fig. 5-
b). Once the actuators are installed, the hook areas of the
device are wrapped around with non-stretchable nylon straps.
These nylon straps not only prevent the hook areas from
being deformed by the pulling forces of the actuators, but
also reduce the slip effect of the fabric on the wearer’s skin.
Multiple actuators may be arranged in parallel and/or series
for increased contraction force and/or length, respectively. To
maximize the angular displacement of the knee, actuators are
connected from the ankle to the top of the thigh. To maximize
the force of bending, actuators are connected from the ankle
Hooks	  
(a)	
 (b)	

(c)	
 (d)	

134	  mm	  
115	  mm	  
Fig. 5. Second Skin prototype structures. (a) A 3D printed leg model.
(b) Stretchable fabric sleeves with multiple hooks. (c) Anterior muscle
installation. (d) Posterior muscle installation.
(a)	
 (b)	

Ar#culated	  
knee	  joint	  
Ar#ﬁcial	  muscles	  
Fig. 6. A complete Second Skin prototype with artiﬁcial muscle installa-
tion. (a) Anterior side. (b) Posterior side.
to the top of the knee and from the top of the thigh to the
bottom of the knee. A complete prototype with total eight
muscles is shown in Fig. 6.
With two pairs of two muscles connected in series on the
anterior side of the leg between the ankle and the top of the
thigh (total four muscles), the device is able to fully extend
the lower leg from less than a 90

knee angle (Fig. 7-a).
With the same actuator arrangement on the posterior side
of the leg, the device is able to ﬂex the lower leg up to a
37

knee angle approximately from a fully extended knee
position (Fig. 7-b).
III. RESULTS
A. Flat Pneumatic Artiﬁcial Muscle Characterization
We ﬁrst characterized individual muscles using our
custom-built test setup, shown in Fig. 8. We installed a
commercial single-axis load cell
3
with an accuracy of 0.02%
3
STL-50, AmCells Corp.
4807
(a)	

(b)	

Fig. 7. Possible actuation motions of Second Skin prototype. (a) Active
knee extension using anterior artiﬁcial muscles. (b) Active knee ﬂexion using
posterior artiﬁcial muscles.
for measuring contraction force of the muscle in a rigid
frame. Using a hand crank, we were able to manually apply
different tensions to the muscle and measure its extension
and contraction lengths. The air pressure to the muscle is
controlled by a pressure regulator. The load cell’s voltage
output is measured using a precision multi-meter and con-
verted to a force value.
For characterization, a single muscle was installed in
the test frame and pressurized with a constant air pressure
with no axial displacement allowed. Then, the muscle was
gradually released using a hand crank until the contraction
force measured by the load cell becomes zero. During this
release, the force proﬁle was recorded. By repeating this
process with different air pressures, the full characterization
plot can be prepared, as shown in Fig. 9. The characterization
result shows that the muscle is able to generate the maximum
initial force of approximately 38N and create the contraction
displacement up to approximately 18mm with 104kPa air
pressure.
B. Second Skin Characterization
The angular displacement of the lower leg was measured
using a manual goniometer as the air pressure of the muscles
varied for both extension and ﬂexion motions. In order to
understand the behavior of the combined leg-device system,
it was necessary to consider the anatomy and mechanical
properties of the biological leg. Since we are aiming to use
our device for rehabilitation of infants or early toddlers, who
still spend most of their time lying either on the back or
on the belly, we decided to test our device in the similar
positions. Fig. 10 shows the results of these characterization
tests when the lower leg is actuated from the fully ﬂexed and
extended positions. In each case, the lower leg was either
extended or ﬂexed with actuation and released back to the
original position using gravity.
In the active leg extension test, a large hysteresis was
observed between the two angle-pressure curves (Fig. 10-a).
This is due to the initial position of the lower leg. In the rest
Load	  cell	  
Ar+ﬁcial	  muscle	  
Hand	  crank	  
Mul+-??meter	  
Pressure	  regulator	  
Fig. 8. Experimental setup for single muscle characterization.
	  	  34	  kPa	  
	  	  48	  kPa	  
	  	  62	  kPa	  
	  	  76	  kPa	  
	  	  90	  kPa	  
104	  kPa	  
Contrac4on	  force	  (N)	  
Contrac4on	  length	  	  (mm)	  
40	  
35	  
30	  
25	  
20	  
15	  
10	  
	  	  5	  
	  	  0	  
0	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  5	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  10	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  15	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  20	  
Fig. 9. Actuation characterization result of ﬂat pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle
position, the distance between the axis of rotation and the
lower leg’s center of mass becomes almost the maximum,
which requires high torque to overcome gravity for lifting
up the lower leg. However, as the lower leg is raised, the
center of mass rapidly moves toward the axis of rotation,
which, in consequence, signiﬁcantly reduces the reaction
torque due to gravity. Once the leg reaches a certain point, it
becomes fully extended and the actuators come fully aligned.
It remains aligned until the actuator pressure decreases by
a signiﬁcant amount (approximately 30% in this test). The
maximum extension angle achieved by actuation in this test
was approximately 95

.
The hysteresis was signiﬁcantly reduced in the active
ﬂexion test (Fig. 10-b). This is due to the much smaller max-
imum knee bending angle than that of of active extension.
During ﬂexion, the muscles always stay aligned to a straight
line and its distance from the axis of rotation gradually
4808
(a)	

(b)	

Angles	  (°)	   100	  
	  	  90	  
	  	  80	  
	  	  70	  
	  	  60	  
	  	  50	  
	  	  40	  
	  	  30	  
	  	  20	  
	  	  10	  
	  	  	  	  0	  
Angles	  (°)	  
40	  
35	  	  	  
30	  
25	  	  	  
20	  
15	  	  	  
10	  
	  	  5	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
	  	  0	  
Pressure	  (kPa)	  
0	  	  	  	  	  10	  	  	  	  20	  	  	  	  30	  	  	  	  40	  	  	  	  50	  	  	  	  60	  	  	  	  70	  	  	  	  80	  	  	  	  90	  
Pressure	  (kPa)	  
0	  	  	  	  	  10	  	  	  	  20	  	  	  	  30	  	  	  	  40	  	  	  	  50	  	  	  	  60	  	  	  	  70	  	  	  	  80	  	  	  	  90	  
Fig. 10. Experimental results of active angular displacement characteriza-
tion. (a) Knee extension result. (b) Knee ﬂexion result.
increases. Although this may increase the torque applied
to the knee joint, it simultaneously decreases the angular
displacement. This linear response can be also observed in
the previous extension test up until approximately 30

knee
angle. The maximum ﬂexion angle achieved by actuation in
this test was approximately 37

.
In both tests, the device showed high repeatability, with
only 1

-3

knee angle variations with several iterations.
These variations were mostly caused by slip of the device
on the leg model. Since the leg model we used was made
of rigid plastic, it was relatively easy to hold the hooks in
the same locations during actuation. However, slip prevention
mechanisms should be more carefully designed and included
with real human users in the future.
In addition to the angular displacements, the output forces
for active extension and ﬂexion were characterized. Using the
same load cell used in the individual muscle characterization
test, the force potential of the stationary leg was measured
Flexion	  (Bending)	  
Load	  cell	  
Extension	  (Straightening)	  
Load	  cell	  
Flexion	  
Extension	  
Force	  (N)	  
Pressure	  (kPa)	  
0	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  10	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  20	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  30	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  40	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  50	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  60	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  70	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  80	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  90	  
8	  
7	  
6	  
5	  
4	  
3	  
2	  
1	  
0	  
Fixed	  
Fixed	  
ActuaFon	  muscles	  
ActuaFon	  muscles	  
Rigid	  string	  
Fig. 11. Knee bending force characterization test setup and result.
at the ankle with the lower leg ﬁxed in the fully ﬂexed and
extended orientation as the actuator pressure varied. Fig. 11
shows the result. This test was performed with the force of
the device pointed downward, and the initial force applied
to the load cell due to the tension of the test setup and
the weight of the leg was subtracted from the results. The
result shows that the active ﬂexion generates much higher
force than the active extension. This is due to the fact that
the ﬂexion muscle is located farther away from the axis of
rotation than the extension muscle is. The maximum forces
measured in this test were approximately 2.5N and 7N for
active leg extension and ﬂexion, respectively.
IV. CHALLENGES
There are multiple challenges that must be addressed
before we are able to conduct tests with human subjects
wearing our Second Skin device.
First, the current prototype is not equipped with any
sensing elements. Different types of sensors will be necessary
not only for implementing any control algorithms but also
for making the device more autonomous and interactive in
response to external stimuli. Recent developments of soft
sensors can be implemented to detect either external stimuli,
such as strain [19], pressure[20], [21], shear stresses [22]
or the shape changes of the device, as previously proposed
in [7], [23]. Soft sensors can be also directly integrated with
artiﬁcial muscles to detect their actuation in real-time, as
demonstrated in [9], [24]. This type of sensor integrated
actuators will provide an active sensing capability to the
device for more accurate control without changing its volume
and weight.
4809
Second, unlike traditional exoskeletons, the force transmis-
sion of the device is realized thorough skin contact. There-
fore, the device must be made with non-slippery materials
to ensure that sufﬁcient force is transmitted to the wearer.
At the same time, the material must allow breathability of
skin and must not cause any skin troubles. Use of polymer
composites [25], [26] or nano hair structures [27] may be a
potential solution to this challenge. Also, a force distribution
mechanism should be added to the sleeves to reduce high
pressure concentrations around the anchor (hook) locations
during actuation.
Another challenge is user safety of the device. Even
though the actuators are made of soft materials, they still
have the potential to generate high force that could poten-
tially damage the wearer’s skin or muscle depending on
the input air source. Therefore, a fault detection mechanism
must be accompanied when the device is used with human
subjects, as discussed in [28], [29]. Also, any failure of an
individual actuator must be detected and compensated by
the control algorithm to prevent the device from acting in an
unexpected or unwanted manner.
V. CONCLUSIONS
A soft wearable robotic device was proposed using com-
pact and lightweight pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles. The proto-
type has eight muscles for bidirectional active knee motions.
Each muscle contains four muscle cells creating maximum
force of 38N and contraction of 18mm. With different com-
binations of actuations, the device was able to create active
motions for knee extension and ﬂexion. The device was
characterized using a 3D printed leg model and demonstrated
the maximum knee extension angle of 95

and ﬂexion angle
of 37

. The device was also able to generate rotational forces
at the ankle approximately 2.5N and 7N for extension and
ﬂexion, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank James Niemi for his
support and feedback in this research. We also thank Dr.
Diana Young for her suggestions and inputs to this project.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Bogue, “Exoskeletons and robotic prosthetics: a review of recent
developments,” Ind. Rob.: Int. J., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 421–427, 2009.
[2] A. B. Zoss, H. Kazerooni, and A. Chu, “Biomechanical design
of the Berkeley lower extremity exoskeleton,” IEEE/ASME Trans.
Mechatron., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 128–138, 2006.
[3] E. Guizzo and H. Goldstein, “The rise of the body bots,” IEEE
Spectrum, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 50–56, 2005.
[4] D. P. Ferris, J. M. Czerniecki, and B. Hannaford, “An ankle-foot
orthosis powered by artiﬁcial peumatic muscles,” J. Appl. Biomech.,
vol. 21, pp. 189–197, 2005.
[5] H. M. Herr and R. D. Kornbluh, “New horizons for orthotic and
prosthetic technology: artiﬁcial muscle for ambulation,” Proc. SPIE,
vol. 5385, pp. 1–9, 2004.
[6] J. F. Veneman, R. Krudhof, E. E. G. Hekman, R. Ekkelenkamp, E. H.
F. V . Asseldonk, and H. van der Kooij, “Design and evaluation of
the LOPES exoskeleton robot for interactive gait rehabilitation,” IEEE
Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng., vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 379–386, 2007.
[7] Y .-L. Park, B. Chen, N. O. P´ erez-Arancibia, D. Young, L. Stirling,
R. J. Wood, E. Goldﬁeld, and R. Nagpal, “Design and control of a
bio-inspired soft wearable robotic device for ankle-foot rehabilitation,”
Bioinspiration & Biomimetics, vol. 9, no. 1, p. 016007, 2014.
[8] M. Wehner, Y .-L. Park, C. J. Walsh, R. Nagpal, R. J. Wood, T. Moore,
and E. Goldﬁeld, “Experimental characterization of components for
active soft orthotics,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Biomed. Rob. Biomecha-
tron., Roma, Italy, June 2012, pp. 1586–1592.
[9] Y .-L. Park, B. Chen, C. Majidi, R. J. Wood, R. Nagpal, and E. Gold-
ﬁeld, “Active modular elastomer sleeve for soft wearable assistance
robots,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., Vilamoura,
Portugal, October 2012, pp. 1595–1602.
[10] L. Stirling, C. Yu, J. Miller, R. J. Wood, E. Goldﬁeld, and R. Nagpal,
“Applicability of shape memory alloy wire for an active, soft orthotic,”
J. Mater. Eng. Perform., vol. 20, no. 4-5, pp. 658–662, 2011.
[11] M. Wehner, B. Quindan, P. Aubin, E. Martinez-Villalpando, M. Bau-
mann, L. Stirling, K. Holt, and R. Wood, “A lightweight soft exosuit
for gait assistance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Rob. Autom., Karlsruhe,
Germany, May 2013, pp. 3347–3354.
[12] I. Galiana, F. L. Hammond, R. D. Howe, and M. B. Popovic,
“Wearable soft robotic device for post-stroke shoulder rehabilitation:
Identifying misalignments,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intell. Rob.
Syst., Vilamoura, Portugal, October 2012, pp. 317–322.
[13] J. Ueda, D. Ming, V . Krishnamoorthy, M. Shinohara, and T. Oga-
sawara, “Individual muscle control using an exoskeleton robot for
muscle function testing,” IEEE Trans. Neural Syst. Rehabil. Eng.,
vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 399–350, 2010.
[14] C.-P. Chou and B. Hannaford, “Measurement and modeling of McK-
ibben pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles,” IEEE Trans. Rob. Autom., vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 90–102, February 1996.
[15] N. Saga, T. Nakamura, and K. Yaegshi, “Mathematical model of
pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle reinforced by straight ﬁbers,” J. Intell.
Mater. Syst. Struct.Mater. Sci., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 175–180, 2007.
[16] F. Daerden and D. Lefeber, “The concept and design of pleated
pneumatic artiﬁcial muscles,” Int. J. Fluid Power, vol. 2, no. 3, pp.
41–50, 2001.
[17] K. Schneider and R. F. Zernicke, “Mass, center of mass, and moment
of intertia estimates for infant limb segments,” J. Biomech., vol. 25,
no. 2, pp. 145–148, 1992.
[18] H. Sun and R. Jensen, “Body segment growth during infancy,” J.
Biomech., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 265–275, 1994.
[19] Y .-L. Park, B. Chen, and R. J. Wood, “Design and fabrication of soft
artiﬁcial skin using embedded microchannels and liquid conductors,”
IEEE Sens. J., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 2711–2718, 2012.
[20] Y .-L. Park, C. Majidi, R. Kramer, P. Berard, and R. J. Wood,
“Hyperelastic pressure sensing with a liquid-embedded elastomer,” J.
Micromech. Microeng., vol. 20, no. 12, p. 125029, 2010.
[21] Y .-L. Park, D. Tepayotl-Ramirez, R. J. Wood, and C. Majidi, “In-
ﬂuence of cross-sectional geometry on the sensitivity of liquid-phase
electronic pressure sensors,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 101, no. 19, 2012.
[22] D. V ogt, Y .-L. Park, and R. J. Wood, “Design and characterization of
a soft multi-axis force sensor using embedded microﬂuidic channels,”
IEEE Sens. J., vol. 13, no. 10, pp. 4056–4064, 2013.
[23] Y . Menguc, Y .-L. Park, E. Martinez-Villalpando, P. Aubin, M. Zisook,
L. Stirling, R. J. Wood, and C. Walsh, “Soft wearable motion sensing
suit for lower limb biomechanics measurements,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ
Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., Karlsruhe, Germany, May 2013, pp. 5289–
5296.
[24] Y .-L. Park and R. J. Wood, “Smart pneumatic artiﬁcial muscle actuator
with embedded microﬂuidic sensing,” in Proc. IEEE Sens. Conf.,
Baltimore, MD, November 2013, pp. 689–692.
[25] D. D. Rossi, F. Carpi, and E. P. Scilingo, “Polymer based interfaces
as bioinspired ’smart skins’,” Adv. Colloid Interfac., vol. 116, no. 1-3,
pp. 165–178, 2005.
[26] S. Ramakrishna, J. Mayer, E. Wintermantel, and K. W. Leong,
“Biomedical applications of polymer-composite materials: a review,”
Compos. Sci. Technol., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 1189–1224, 2001.
[27] L. Ge, L. Ci, A. Goyal, R. Shi, L. Mahadevan, P. M. Ajayan,
and A. Dhinojwala, “Cooperative adhesion and friction of compliant
nanohairs,” Nano Lett., vol. 10, no. 11, pp. 4509–4513, 2010.
[28] A. D. Santis, B. Siciliano, A. D. Luca, and A. Bicchi, “An atlas of
physical human-robot interaction,” Mech. Mach. Theory, vol. 43, no. 3,
pp. 253–270, 2008.
[29] Y .-L. Park, D. Young, B. Chen, R. J. Wood, R. Nagpal, and E. C.
Goldﬁeld, “Networked bio-inspired modules for sensorimotor control
of wearable cyberphysical devices,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput.
Network. Commun. (ICNC), San Diego, CA, January 2013, pp. 92–96.
4810
